1_1 Block diagram (looking to the East) and associated NS section across the Pelvoux massif and the Meije dome, with the main thrusts and localities cited in the text—1: col de Méollion and Sommet Drouvet, north of Orcières;

1_1 Northern side of Les Bans valley (Onde river); 

1_1 Northern side of Ailefroide valley, between Ailefroide and Pelvoux villages; 

1_1 Vallon de Chambran, SE of Rochers de l’Yret; 

1_1 from NE slopes of the Combeynot massif (Rochers de la Madeleine) to southern slopes of Crête de Chaillol (W of Lautaret pass);

3_1 NE-SW geological cross section;

3_2 Interpreted sections show the main structural features crosscutting the Apulian Platform and allochthonous units. Interpretation of stratigraphic horizons and both low-angle and highangle faults are based on available well log data;

3_3 Time/space evolutionary model proposed for the Monte Alpi foreland basin system. The faults active during the main tectonic stages are illustrated in the 3D block diagrams, in which the geometry of the sedimentary depocenters is also reported;

4_1 Schematic cross section with sedimentary facies observed: 1 = hemipelagics; 2 = talus; 3 = massive and poorly stratified mudstones; 4 = thin bedded stratified mudstones and silty mudstones;

4_1 Synthetic block diagram of the scarp;

5_1 Violet faults represent the Main Marmara Fault system in the Central Basin.;

5_1 Black dots are microseismicity localizations from Kandilli Observatory data.;

5_1 Green indicates phylite, quartzite. Grey indicates the ductile domain.;

6_7 acoustic basement (pre-Cretaceous), U0: Lower retaceous (Berriasian to Barremian); U1: Aptian-Albian; U2: Upper Cretaceous; U3-4: syn-rift to early post-rift (Rupelian to early  Burdigalian); U5-6: undifferenciated post-rift Miocene (mid-Burdigalian to Messinian) and Plio-Quaternary.;

6_8 Lower Cretaceous (Berriasian to Barremian); U1: Aptian-Albian; U5: post-rift (mid-Burdigalian to Messinian); U6: Plio-Quaternary.;

6_9 Lower Cretaceous (Berriasian to Barremian); U1: Aptian-Albian; U2: Upper-Cretaceous; U5: post-rift (mid-Burdigalian to Messinian); U6: Plio-Quaternary.;

6_12 U3-4: syn-rift to early post-rift (Rupelian to early Burdiagalian); U6: Plio-Quaternary; H1 to H9: seismic horizons.;

6_13 Land to sea geological cross-section based on field observations onshore and seismic interpretation offshore. Offshore, the thickness of units U4 and U5 are is estimated by using a mean interval velocity of 3200 m/s. U0: Lower Cretaceous (Berriasian to Barremian); U4: syn-rift to early post-rift (Chattian to early Burdigalian); U5: post-rift (mid-Burdigalian to Messinian)

8_2 Stratigraphic chart of the Late Cretaceous to Cenozoic series in the northwestern part of the Arc Basin. These series pinchout on deformed and overturned Mesozoic series of the western SainteVictoire System and correspond to syntectonic breccia deposits with growth strata pattern labeled.;

9_5 Multichannel seismic section revealing of the structures beneath Opouawe Bank. Yellow shading on seismic zoom indicates packages of high-amplitude reflections beneath seeps.;

9_7 Illustrating distributed extensional fault network in the shallow core of the anticline above an active thrust fault and beneath the seeps.;

12_1 Section of southern Po basin complex from AGIP semic profile(after Pieri and Groppi, 19_1). Piggyback basin consists of middle Pilocene to Quaternary deposits. Older pre-mesozoic deposits can be regarded as ancient main-basin sediments afterward involved in thrusting.

12_2 Section through Graus basin and marginal area of Ebro basin. Onlap and bypassing have been observed in field; section is modified from Seguret.

12_3 Section from field observation showing sedimentary infill of western of Graus basin. Arrows show paleocurrents.

13_1 Nested rift-inrift structure and young sediment fill are seen in the cross section (A–B; below, single-channel sparker profile)

14_1 Interpreted section of migrated seismic reflection profile TA16 across the Alpine Fault at George Basin.

14_2 Interpreted section of migrated seismic reflection profile TA14 across the northern end of the Secretary-Nancy Basin. Prominent unconformities and seismic reflections identified within discrete sedimentary basins are labeled but can rarely be correlated across the Alpine Fault.

15_1 Bottom: TPAO seismic section. Top: Line drawing. Thick black, Upper Cretaceous basement. Green, Upper Miocene (Kirazli) rifting faults at the origin of the southern shelf basin. Red, Lower Pliocene (Alçitepe) mostly reverse and transcurrent faults associated with the formation and evolution of the South Marmara Fault (SMF). Blue, post-Alçitepe normal faults associated with the subsidence of the Marmara basin to the north. Note the Lower Pliocene uplift of the central part of the section, which is syntectonic with the activity of the MSS Fault (figure 1). 

17_1 Rift-infill geometries on a geoseismic section across the southern Horda Platform (modified from Steel and Ryseth, 1990; their Figure 6

17_2 Geoseismic cross-section across the east margin of the Snorre fault block, showing details of fault block erosion (modified from Gabrielsen, 1986; his plate 4.5). Note the significant fault scarp retreat and the presence of a young failure plane and slightly rotated scarp segment. Note also the development of shallow listric faults in the post-rift succession above the old master fault.

18_1 Details of seismic line in the Papuan Basin (west of the study area) calibrated to wells. BR1, BR2, and BR3 refer to basal rift unconformities (see text for further explication). Basin names are adapted from existing nomenclature (e.g., Kutubu, Pasca, or Pandora features) as well as from the name of local languages in Papua New Guinea. Note that seismic interpretation enabled to further subdivide the sequences identified in the wells.

18_2 Seismic line showing the overall shape of rifted basins in the vicinity of the Eastern and Papuan Plateaus.

18_3 Seismic data showing the continent-ocean transition (COT) in the deep Coral Sea Basin. General seismic line showing the two rift settings (Jurassic and Cretaceous) in the Coral Sea Basin and their relationships with the oceanic crust and overlying postrift deposits. Note the relatively narrow rifted margin of Late Cretaceous age that is believed to represent the hyperstreched domain prior the early Cenozoic seafloor spreading. Note also the presence of basement high that separates the Late Cretaceous rifted margin from the Jurassic rifted margin.

18_4 Seismic data showing the continent-ocean transition (COT) in the deep Coral Sea Basin. The continent-ocean transition, showing the Cretaceous rotated fault-blocks and the Coral Sea oceanic crust characterized by a prominent reflector and downlaps of postrift sediments.

19_1 Crustal-scale cross-section showing the three decollement levels (red lines) and the xtension at depth of the brittle–ductile shear zone in the middle crust. The red dotted line is the outline of the fluid-rich zone inferred from seismic tomography (Gautier et al., 20_6).

19_2 Restored cross-section of the upper crustal portion of the Corinth Rift. This part of the section has been balanced using the Pindos–Gavrovo–Tripolitza interface as a reference line. All blocks between normal faults are rigid except the block north of the Tsivlos fault that has been distorted to take into account the roll-over structure.

19_3 Cross-section along the coast near Kolympithra on the NE coast of Tinos. The detachment is located between the upper plate made of serpentinite cropping out on a nearby islet and the lower plate here made essentially of micaschists and minor metabasites and marbles. A gradient of strain is observed from SW to NE and the deformation become more and more brittle through time. Shallow-dipping normal faults cut and offset the foliation (upper panel) and fluids invade the micaschists in the vicinity of the detachment. Numerous quartz veins are observed in the highly retrograded micaschists that evolve progressively into a reddish cataclasite.

20_1 Structural interpretation of the two synthetic seismic transects across the Ceduna subbasin (see Figure 1 forlocation). A-A0, western transect; B-B0, eastern transect. Potoroo-1 and Gnarlyknots-1A wells are projected. D1,de´collement level located at the base of the Late Albian shales of the Blue Whale Supersequence. D2, de´collement level located at the base of the Late Santonian-Early Campanian Hammerhead sequence set 1. COT, continent-ocean transition zone.

20_2 Detail of seismic line 1 and northern part of seismic line 2 (transect A-A0) across the Madura Shelf and inner Ceduna subbasin (see Figures 1 and 4 for location). Horizons were calibrated using projected (pjt.) data from the Potoroo-1 and Gnarlyknots-1A wells. Mulgara faults are indicated by medium black lines. These faults branch downward onto the de´collement D1 (thick black line) at the base of the shales of the Blue Whale Supersequence. Inferred half graben of the Potoroo fault system (dashed black lines) underlies the delta system. Vertical exaggeration is 2.

20_3 Detail of the southern part of seismic line 2 and northern part of seismic line 3 (transect A-A0) through the Ceduna and Recherche subbasins (see Figures 1 and 4 for location). Mulgara faults are indicated by medium black lines. These faults branch downward onto the de´collement D1 (thick black line) at the base of the shales of the Blue Whale Supersequence. Note the scarcity of compressional features at the delta toe. Vertical exaggeration is 2.

20_4 Detail of the southern part of seismic line 3 (transect A-A0) across the Recherche subbasin and the South Australian Abyssal Plain (see Figures 1 and 4 for location). In the Recherche subbasin, seismic data image highly extended continental crust with zones of exhumed subcontinental mantle rocks. These features are sealed by the Early CampanianEarly Maastrichtian Hammerhead sequence set 2. On the South Australian Abyssal Plain, the oceanic crust is draped by Cenozoic strata of the Wobbegong and Dugong supersequences. COT, continent-ocean transition zone. Vertical exaggeration is 2.

20_5 Detail of northern part of seismic line 4 (transect B-B0) across the Madura Shelf and Ceduna subbasin (see Figures 1 and 4 for location). Horizons were calibrated using projected data from the Potoroo-1 and Gnarlyknots-1A wells. Mulgara faults are indicated by medium black lines. These faults branch downward onto the shallow de´collement D1 (thick black line) at the base of the Blue Whale Supersequence. Seismic data show typical fault-related rollover anticlines within the White Pointer delta system, sealed by strata of the Hammerhead sequence set 1. Half grabens of the Potoroo fault system underlie the delta system. Vertical exaggeration is 2.

20_6 Detail of the southern part of seismic line 4 and the northern part of seismic line 5 (transect B-B0) across the Ceduna and Recherche subbasin (see Figures 1 and 4 for location). Faults are indicated by medium black lines. Sediments of the White Pointer delta system overlie subcontinental mantle rocks. The Hammerhead delta system is associated with gravitational sliding of the Kowari fault system which connects downward with the shallower de´collement D2. Note the growth strata pattern within the Hammerhead sequence set 2. Vertical exaggeration is _2.

20_7 Detail of the southern part of seismic line 5 (transect B-B0) across the Recherche subbasin and South Australian Abyssal Plain (see Figures 1 and 4 for location). Seismic line 5 images highly extended continental crust (thick black line) within a zone of exhumed mantle rocks in the Recherche subbasin. COT, continent-ocean transition zone. Vertical exaggeration is 2.

21_1 North-south cross section showing variations in upper and lower crustal thickness. The crustal thickness model was constructed from surface topography and upper crustal density (2.67 g/cm3).

22_1 Simplified geological cross-sections of selected transects across the southern margin of the Gediz Graben, showing the relationship between low-angle and high-angle normal faults.

27_1 Seismic profiles (vertical cross sections) through the outer shelf in the western area of the Golfe du Lion. Three kinds of seismic facies have been identified: in blue, low angle clinoforms made up of silts and clays (PI); in yellow, high angle clinoforms made up of sands (PII); in green dunes made up of reworked sand (PIII). The paired prisms PI–PII+ (PIII) (blue-orange+ green) form the sedimentary motif that repeats itself. The Major discontinuities are in red between sequences. Two sequences (S4 and S5) are clearly identified with the paired prisms PI–PII (blue-orange). But prism PII of S5 and prism PII of S4 have different geometries. Prism PII of S5 is less than 10 m thick on its outer limit and this step is not so steep. We interpret this geometry as due to erosion of PII in this area (probably submarine erosion during transgression). On the contrary, PII of S4 is thick (reaching 40 m) with a very steep step and very well defined and preserved sigmoïde shape. Here, prism PII has not been eroded

27_2 Five sequences are identified. In this area, prism PII of S5 is very well preserved from erosion, its top and outer limit represents the Coast at LGM (bathymetry= 0), it lies at ?112 m below present day sea level (RSL=?112 m).

28_1 Our system generates geological stories from a single sketch such as this cross-section of the Chartreuse mountain. Layers (and maximum ages) are indicated with di?erent colors: Yellow - Miocene ( ?23 × 106 years), Khaki - Late Cretaceous (?90×106 years), Red - Urgonian (?130_106 years), Green - Hauterivian (?133 × 106 years), Light green - Berriasian (?145 × 106 years), Light blue - Tithonian (?152 × 106 years), Blue - Oxfordian (?163 × 106 years).

29_1 Section A from Bucak to Seydi?ehir. The Mesozoic stratigraphy has been generalized for clarity. A detailed large version of the section showing lithostratigraphic constraints is included in Figure S2 in the supporting information. White areas below the colored stratigraphic units were included in section balancing but contain an unknown stratigraphy. (a) The balanced cross section of Section A. (b) Retrodeformed Section A, restored to the pre-late phase of thrusting. (c)Retrodeformed Section A restored to the pre-Eocene phase of thrusting.

30_1 Section of the quaternary terrains of the Gavot plateau.

31_1 Geological section of the Jipijapa sector. The Jipijapa massif. Vertical exaggeration x 6. Location figure 2.2. Legend and colors figure 2.3. F4 = Cascol fault; F5 = Jipijapa fault.

33_1 SSW-NNE section on the Lavelanet map near Monset.

33_2 Structural diagram of the Condé-sur-Noireau and Falaise maps.

35_1 Geological sections of the mountains on both sides of Lake Uri (Buxtorf 1934, Fig. 4). Legend + according to Buxtorf: S: slope and torrent deposits, Q: moraine, P: Stad- and PecMnidae schists, C: conglomerates, N: Nummulite limestones, etc. (LutéMen), Wa: FormaMon de Wang (MaestrichMen), Am: Schistes d'Amden (Sénonien), Se: Schistes de Seewen (Turonien), G: "Gault" (Albien-ApMen sup.), U: SchraVenkalk (Urgonien and Orbitolina layers = O), D: Drusberg form (Lower Barremian), K: Siliceous limestone (Hauterivian), Vk & Di: Valanginian limestones and Diphyoides limestone, Vm: Valanginian marl, B: Berriasian limestones, Z : Zementstein diapers (Berriasien inf. - Portlandien sup.), M: Malm, A: Argovien, D: Dogger (Callovien-Bajocien), UD: Dogger inf. (Aalénien), W: Wildflysch, SchF: Flysch du Schächental, Altorf sandstone, etc.).

37_1 Aptian limestone, sand and sandy marl; 2: Albian-Cenomanian dolomitic limestone; 3: Cenomanian-Turonian clay and gypsum; 4: Turonian dolomitic limestone, 5: Eocene clay, limestone, gypsum and phosphate; 6: Messinian continental red ocher clayed sandstone including abundant gypsum; 7: Messinian continental red ocher clay sandstone including rare gypsum recovered by marine Pliocene (Sghari and Mercier, 2008).

37_2 This structure is post-Messinian during which Chott Bou Omrane formed (central zone of the section). 1: Aquitanian (Lower Miocene) red clay; 2: Langhian-Serravalien (Middle Miocene) fluvio-deltaic sands; 3: marine Tortonian (Upper Miocene) green clay; 4: Messinian ocher sandy clay with rare gypsum and conglomerate at the top; 5: silty clay including abundant gypsum (thickness of gypsum: 20_25 m) under control of the MSC; 6: sandy clay with oysters (see fig. 8 and fig. 9) revealed.

38_1 The Quaternary stringers forming a layer of variable thickness (LIM); the formations of Brussels and Mons-en-Pévèle, constituting the aquifer sands of the Eocene (BXL and MEP); the summit of the Carnières formation, constituting the aquiclude of Ypresian clays (CAR)

39_1 Cut upside down of the scarpe plain (south-north).

39_2 Nond-south geological section of bellonne at villier les cagnicourt.

39_3 Schematic geological section from Mericourt to Hein-sur-cojeul.

39_4 Schematic geological section of Hein-sur-cojeul in Lesboeufs.

40_1 West-East geological section of the Brussels region In Brussels, geothermal energy is only considered for very low temperature applications (very shallow (<10 m) or shallow (10 - 300 m). For shallow areas, depending on the depth and location of the site, geothermal wells will be able to exploit the aquifers located in three geological areas: the water table in the Brussels sand (in the higher area of Brussels), the water table in the Landenian sand (Hannut sand), and deeper in the underlying rock layers.

42_1 Geological section of the Pic Saint Loup area [Pouchet, 1880] showing a timid attempt to interpret the deep structure of the Pic Saint Loup: the extrapolation is limited to the most superficial parts and there are some structural inconsistencies (especially to the north du Pic).

42_2 Regional geological section constructed by integrating seismic reflection data [Benedicto, 1996]: these data show in particular that all of the tectonic structures in the region (overlap and folds of the Pic Saint Loup, normal faults in Les Matelles, Prades, etc.) n 'only affect the sedimentary series, separated from the old basement by the clay plastic layers of the Triassic (in black).

43_1 We see that the town is directly built on the limestone layer of the Lower Bajocian. Below is a layer of Marne type Micaceous, then the layer of iron ore, the Lorraine kitten of oolithic type which rests on a layer of the toarcian.

44_1 Geological section perpendicular to the Aussonnelle valley passing through the Bel-Soleil site.

44_2 Stratigraphic section taken along the axis of hole 05_188, across the entire pickled sector.

45_1 The foreland basin successions are decoupled from the autochtonous carbonate platforms in favor of a secondary detachment horizon branched into the major one toward the hinterland. These secondary detachment horizons are the evaporitic Messinian Gessosso-solifera Formation in the Central Apennines.

45_2 Structural section within the pleated chain of Chaco, Bolivia.

45_3 Structural section within the pleated chain of the Chartreuse.

45_4 Cross section of the Ionian and Peri-Adriatic Zone.

45_5 Simplified cross section of the overlapping units of the southern part of the Ionian Zone, and panorama illustrating these units.

46_1 Detail of the northern part of the crustal-scale cross section showing the structure of the Biscay Anticlonorium and the Landes Platform.

46_2 Detail of the central part of the crustal-scale cross section showing the structure of the Bilbao Anticlonorium, the Biscay synclinorium, and the Biscay anticlinorium.

48_1 Simplified geological section through the Andes of Patagonia between latitudes 46_15’S and 47 ° 10’S

48_2 Geological section at latitude 47 ° 40 ’, in the system of folds and associated overlaps

49_1 Geological cross-section of the Grand Luberon from the Mourre Nègre to the Durance River. 1/ Thrust fault, 2/ Clayey limestones (Lower Cretaceous), 3/ Valanginian marls, 4/ Neocomian limestones and calcareous marls, 5/ Undifferentiated marine Miocene, 6/ Miocene lacustrine limestones, 7/ Red silt of Cabrières, 8/ Upper Miocene continental conglomerate (Valensole 1).

49_2 Stratigraphic section of Terre Rouge.  On distingue les unités stratigraphiques suivantes  1/  esquisse de sol rouge (rose, 7,5YR 8/4) à tendance limono-sableuse. Quelques éléments du substratum (ici constitué de molasse miocène) sont présents sous la forme de petits cailloutis sub-anguleux à anguleux de 1 à 3 cm de grand axe. Quelques phénomènes d’altérations et de carbonatation secondaire (agrégats) sont à signaler ; 2/ niveau quasiment identique à pédogenèse plus marquée (rose, 7,5 YR 7/4) et cailloutis épars sub-anguleux à sub- émoussé ; 3/ ensemble limono-sableux rose (7,5 YR 8/4) à cailloutis épars (sub-anguleux à sub-émoussé et de 1 à 5 cm de grand axe) ; 4/ « sol rouge » (brun clair, 7,5 YR 6/4) assez développé à tendance argilo-limoneuse contenant d’importants et nombreux charbons de Pinus type sylvestris (date obtenue : 51 000 ± 3 000 BP) ; 5/ niveau rose (7,5 YR 8/4) assez sableux à cailloutis épars (sub-anguleux à sub-émoussé de 1 à 3 cm de grand axe) et phénomènes de carbonatation secondaire  ; 6/ « sol rouge » (jaune rouge, 5 YR 6/6) à tendance argilo-limoneuse. Quelques cailloutis épars (sub-anguleux et de 1 à 3 cm de grand axe) et de nombreux charbons de Pinus type sylvestris (date obtenue : 46600 ± 1600 BP) sont à remarquer ; 7/ nappe caillouteuse en contact ravinant sur le « sol rouge » du niveau 6, composée d’un cailloutis calcaire (matériel lithologique d’amont) sub-anguleux à anguleux, de 5 à 40 cm de grand axe, emballé dans une matrice sableuse (blanche, 10 YR 9/2) fortement arbonatée ; 8/ ensemble limono-sableux blanc (5 Y 8/1) ; 9a-d/ alternance de niveaux à gélifracts (cailloutis calcaire) sub-anguleux de 5 à 40 cm de grand axe emballésdans une matrice sableuse blanche (5 Y 8/1) fortement carbonatée ; 10/ niveau caillouteux (cailloutis calcaire sub-anguleux de 1 à 10 cm de grand axe) à lentilles limono-sableuses blanches (5 Y 8/1) très carbonatées et macro-charbons (branche carbonisée provenant de Pinus type sylvestris datée à 32000 ± 300 BP)

50_1 Schematic section of the Central Andes showing the different morphostructural units. 

50_2 Structural sections through the Internal and External sub-Alpine zones.

50_3 Structural sections through the Internal and External sub-Alpine zones. 

50_4 Structural section of the northern subandine zone of Bolivia.

50_5 Structural section of the transported basin of the Alto Beni.

51_1 We can see on the section, along the axis of the anticline, that the Pleistocene terraces rest directly on the limestones, both at Cussac and at the bottom of the current estuary. The Flandrian clays, which cover them, make these aquifers captive: the pressures stabilize the piezometric level above the level of the marsh soil (see also stop 2 of the trip dedicated to the New Island).

52_1 Geological profile across the central Jura Mountains of Switzerland and France. The cross section displays a thin-skinned tectonic style with the main décollement located within a Middle Triassic anhydrite formation. Partial inversion of Permo-Carboniferous grabens point to a mild degree of basement involvement.

52_2 Geological profile across the Wind River Range basement uplift, adapted from Moores and Twiss (19_5). A single thrust fault cuts across the entire crust and offsets the crust-mantle boundary.

52_3 Geological profile across the Southern Appalachians, redrawn and simplified from Hatcher et al. (1989). Crystalline basement of the margin of the North American craton is thrust onto the craton itself in a style conformable to basement-involved thin-skinned tectonics. The décollement horizon climbs northwestward into the Paleozoic sedimentary strata resulting in a thin-skinned tectonic style within the Valley and Ridge Province and the Cumberland Plateau. The accreted terranes at the rear (Inner Piedmont and Avalonia) are thrust onto the North American craton.

55_1 Geological section showing the sequence of folded strata and location of Messinian deposits in the Bou Omrane syncline (A). Location in fig. 1B. 1: Aptian limestone, sand and sandy marl; 2: Albian-Cenomanian dolomitic limestone; 3: Cenomanian-Turonian clay and gypsum; 4: Turonian dolomitic limestone, 5: Eocene clay, limestone, gypsum and phosphate; 6: Messinian continental red ocher clayed sandstone including abundant gypsum; 7: Messinian continental red ocher clay sandstone including rare gypsum recovered by marine Pliocene (Sghari and Mercier, 2008)

55_2 Longitudinal geological section showing the collapse of the western (Gafsa basin) and eastern (Naoual basin) compartments and elevation of the central compartment (Bou Omran; B). Location in fig. 1B. This structure is post-Messinian during which Chott Bou Omrane formed (central zone of the section). 1: Aquitanian (Lower Miocene) red clay; 2: Langhian-Serravalien (Middle Miocene) fluvio-deltaic sands; 3: marine Tortonian (Upper Miocene) green clay; 4: Messinian ocher sandy clay with rare gypsum and conglomerate at the top; 5: silty clay including abundant gypsum (thickness of gypsum: 20_25 m) under control of the MSC; 6: sandy clay with oysters (see fig. 8 and fig. 9) revealed by A. Sghari and J.-L. Mercier (2008).

56_1 Synthetic hydrogeological section through the northern part of the Jeffara basin between El Hamma and Gabès.

57_1 This cross section is sub-parallel to the Wamsutter arch and reflects the shallowest Fort Union Formation coal across the GDB. It highlights the two members of the Fort Union: the upper Fort Union is the Overland Member (with a basal sandstone package present in all but the western-most wells in the cross section), and the lower Fort Union is the China Butte Member. The Lance Formation is divided into a Red Rim Member at the top and the underlying (unnamed) lower member below. The cross section shows thicker units overall in the deeper part of the central basin, and a thinner China Butte Member and Lance Formation on the flank of the Rock Springs uplift. The Red Rim Member of the Lance Formation does not reach the western third of the GDB, either due to non-deposition on the structurally high Rock Springs uplift or erosion after deposition from later movement of the Rock Springs uplift.

57_2 This cross section highlights a thickening Lance Formation to the east, that is approximately 400 feet (122 m) thicker than on A-A’. The Red Rim Member only extends across the eastern half of this cross section. The China Butte Member thins to the west onto the flank of the Rock Springs uplift where all but the Deadman coals are present. The absence of lower China Butte coals on the flank of the Rock Springs uplift suggests the uplift was structurally high during China Butte time and the older coals that are present elsewhere in the GDB were not deposited near or on this structural high.

57_3 This northern GDB section shows a very thick Lance Formation throughout the GDB, with a maximum thickness toward the east. There is only a very thin Red Rim Member in the center of the cross section. Coals from both the Cherokee and China Butte coal zones do not continue to the eastern wells in this cross section. This absence of coals may be indicative of Paleocene subsidence patterns. Isochore maps show the thickest parts of the GDB are in the northeast, suggesting a higher rate of relative subsidence that would have preferentially attracted and preserved fluvial deposition in this part of the basin.

57_4 This cross section shows variability of the Overland Member of the Fort Union Formation. Thinning onto the east flank of the Rock Springs uplift is accentuated by the erosional contact (unconformity) between the Fort Union Formation and the overlying Wasatch Formation. The Overland Member thickens significantly to the north, away from influence of the Rock Springs uplift, but no Cherokee coals are interpreted in this region. The basal sands of the Overland Member only appear in one well. The Lance Formation thickens distinctly in the northern third of the cross section.

57_5 This cross section is similar to B-B’ in that it highlights the deepest part of the Great Divide Basin. In E-E’ the coal beds of the China Butte Member are relatively straightforward, and the overall thickness of the China Butte does not vary. The thick Cherokee coal zone of the Overland Member is more discontinuous than in other sections, but is still apparent. The Scotty Lake coals highlighted in the Picket Lake W-1_104 A 1 well (T26N R97W) are here interpreted as part of the Cherokee coals and not Wasatch Formation coals (Eocene) as assumed by the operators of the wells in that region (WOGCC, 20_5). This section shows the deepest Fort Union coals in the GDB.

57_6 This is the easternmost cross section in the GDB. It shows, from south to north, a thickening of the Overland Member and a separation of the Cherokee coals. The basal sand package of the Overland maintains relative uniform thickness, but the China Butte Member thins slightly toward the south. The China Butte coals are contiguous and thick, and become quite numerous in the northeast part of the GDB, a feature not observed in outcrop. The Red Rim Member of the Lance Formation is only present in the southern two thirds of F-F’, as the Lance Formation thickens considerably into the northeast part of the basin. 

58_1 Borehole litho- and bio-stratigraphic correlations across the central CB (Fig.1B for location), showing the location of core-samples with dated detrital zircons (simplified from Linol, 20_3, and Linol et al., 20_4a). U1, U2 and U3 mark major unconformities determined from analysis of seismic.

58_1 Simplified sketch interpretation of 137_09 survey showing extension of the Offshore Eastern Otway Basin (drawn based on Palmowski, 20_4 & Perez – Gussinye and Reston, 20_1)

58_2 Three widely accepted continental extension models (Frazer et al., 20_7).

58_3 The temporal evolution of the center of the rift of a passive non – volcanic margin, from the onset of extension up to crustal separation (modified after Perez – Gussinye and Reston,20_1) COB = Continent Ocean Boundary, CMB = Continent Mantle Boundary.

58_4 Interpreted & Non-interpreted Seismic Profile of Os02 3D XL – 2939.

59_1 Seismic profi le across the subaqueous clinoform (from Correggiari et al., 20_1) versus (bottom) the buildup of successive model surfaces predicted for millennial-scale variations in the rate of sediment supply.

60_1 Scanning electron microscopy of the surface (top) and cross-section (down) of orange oil-loaded film; control (a), orange oil ME-loaded films namely FME 20 (b), FME 25 (c), and FME 30 (d).

61_1 Schematic cross-section showing the structural configuration of the hydrocarbon accumulations together with across-fault fluid relationships. E-S7 is superimposed on the original figure (adapted after Frewin et al., 20_1).

62_2 Structural map of the 1At1 surface (regional interpretation) with the main faults showing the location of the E-S and surrounding wells.

62_3 Regional stratigraphic cross-section from west to east flattened on the 13At1 horizon.

62_4 Stratigraphic cross-section from west to east flattened on the 13At1 horizon, incorporating the main wells of the study.

62_5 Regional structural cross-section from west to east.

62_6 Structural cross-section from west to east incorporating the main wells of the study.

62_7 Seismic section through the E-S field showing some interpreted surfaces and main faults.

62_8 Facies model: Cross-section through the main wells.

62_9 Porosity model: Cross-section through the main wells. Figures 5.26 and 5.27 show the porosity model along a cross-section through the main wells and at different stratigraphic levels.

63_1 Schematic dip-oriented cross-section through the Dorotea (Kd) and uppermost Tres Pasos (Ktp) Formations in the Ultima Esperanza district of Chile. Southward-prograding delta and slope clinoforms illustrate a highly diachronous in-filling of the Magallanes-Austral foredeep during latest Cretaceous time. Clinoform surfaces represent approximate ‘time lines,’ or paleodepositional surfaces, in the stratigraphy. Stars indicate the positions of detrital zircon samples.

63_2 Burial history plots produced using unconformity scenarios proposed by (a) Fosdick et al. (20_5) and (b) Skarmeta & Castelli (19_7). Hot colours indicate high sedimentation rates, and cool colours indicate lower rates. Note that both (a) and (b) predict similar rates, which peak during deposition of the Tres Pasos Formation (Ktp) and decrease abruptly during deposition of the Dorotea Formation (Kd). Models do not account for Neogene (post-18 Ma) uplift.

64_1 North-south section across the eastern Arkoma basin, including the southern portion of the study area. Depicts the subsurface distribution of the three divisions of the Atoka Formation (Sutherland, 1988).

65_1 Present-day position of Early Jurassic basins of the Southern Alps within the general structure of the Alps (please note that partly emerged areas west of the Lombardian Basin are not outlined) and schematic cross-section across the Southern Alps rifted margin of Adria after the first Early Jurassic extensional stage (modified from Bosellini et al. 19_1; Channell & Kozur 19_7; Placer 2008; Berra et al. 2009; Rožic 20_6).

66_1 Cross sections for single top-quark production calculated with HATHOR for pp scattering compared with the corresponding MCFM results. For each production mode the relative deviation between both programs is shown. The width of the uncertainty bands indicates the statistical integration error of MCFM. The interesting area around the actual top-quark mass is enlarged on the left side of the figure.

66_2 Contributions to the partonic cross section for single top-quark production (s-channel, upper plot) (Wt channel, lower plot) as a function of the partonic centre-of-mass energy for a top-quark mass of 172.5GeV. The scales µR and µF are set to the mass of the top quark. Here, q and ¯q indicate all applicable flavours for the given channel.

67_1 Location of the new study sites and results of the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (SNT1, SNT2 data modified from Sans et al.,20_3) South of the Busa syncline and along the Cardener Valley with location of the cross section of Figure 4B. Same symbols as in Figure 3C. B) Geological cross-section (modified from Vergés, 19_3) including selected and simplified magnetic anisotropy results shown in A.

67_2 Conceptual cross section across an imbricated thrust wedge, showing the extent of the Penetrative Strain (PES) forelandward away from the structural front, in relation to the outermost structure.

68_1 Scanning electron micrographs of submicron emulsion films: in the cross-section pictures the evaporation surface of the film is on the top. The surface micrographs showed the surface in contact with the air during drying. Films were observed at an intensity of 10 kV and magnification of 580 (surfaces) or 1400 (cross-sections).

69_1 W-E cross section of the Kane Basin from A' (Judge Daly Promontory) to A (Inglefield Land; please note the central map for the location of the cross section). The westernmost part is deduced from seismic data from the Dobbin Bay. The easternmost part is derived from the Inglefield Land stratigraphy from Dawes. The yellow colored part of the central map shows the extent of the Cretaceous-Cenozoic Franklin Pierce Basin (FPB). The solid red line shows the proposed plate boundary between Greenland and North America within the Kane Basin. The dashed red lines show a potential continuation of the plate boundary. The purple ovals mark the positions imaged by the photographs. Ellesmere Island view to the north, Washington Land view to the east (photographs from Reid et al. [20_6] (Greenland)), and courtesy of Karsten Piepjohn (Ellesmere Island).

70_1 Cross-section morphologies of zeolite-filled PU membranes with the magnitude of 750: (a) PU

70_2 Cross-section morphologies of zeolite-filled PU membranes with the magnitude of 750:(b) PU/zeolite 3A

70_3 Cross-section morphologies of zeolite-filled PU membranes with the magnitude of 750: PU/zeolite 3A (12%).

71_1 In France, engineers tried to solve the stability problems by designing flatter slopes above SWL, and by applying extremely heavy (cubic and parallelepiped) concrete blocks as the armour layer. They also started to use smaller-sized stone systematically in the core of the structure. The breakwater of Marseilles (1845) became a successful example for the French speaking world, just like the Dover breakwater in the English speaking world. However, it was recognized that the Marseilles type of solution required very heavy armour units and also a lot of material in the cross section, especially in deeper water (Figure 2-12).

71_2 Possible cross-section of semi-circular caisson breakwater for extremely high breakers.

71_3 Cross section of curved-slit breakwater at Funakawa Port.

72_1 3D and top views of the standard serpentine micromixer with a rectangular cross-section defined by W = 200 m and H = 100 m.

72_2 3D and top views of the new serpentine micromixer design employing non-rectangular cross-sections. As shown above, the orientation of the cross-section of the mixer is changed after each turn of the serpentine.

72_3 Transversal concentration distribution at various positions along the channel for (a) a standard serpentine micromixer and (b) a serpentine micromixer with a non-rectangular cross-section (Re = 20). The concentration is mapped at both the midpoint and the end of each mixing unit.

75_1 Geological cross-section (modified from Vergés, 1993) including selected and simplified magnetic anisotropy results shown in A.

75_2 Conceptual cross section (not to scale) across an imbricated thrust wedge, showing the extent of the Penetrative Strain (PES) forelandward away from the structural front, in relation to the outermost structure (modified from Lacombe and Mouthereau, 1999).

76_1 Structure map, northern North Sea. Geoseismic cross-sections presented in subsequent figures are marked 

76_2 Schematic cross-section of a rift graben. Note rotation of strata away from graben axis during the main rift stage 

76_3 and towards the graben axis during the post-rift stage

76_4 Geoseismic cross-section across the east margin of the Snorre fault block, showing details of fault block erosion (modified from Gabrielsen, 1986; his plate 4.5). Note the significant fault scarp retreat and the presence of a young failure plane and slightly rotated scarp segment. Note also the development of shallow listric faults in the post-rift succession above the old master fault. See Figure I for location 

76_5 Geoseismic cross-section across the Lomre-Uer Terraces, showing the Cretaceous post-rift evolution (with the courtesy of I. Johnsrud and F. Livbjerg, Norsk Hydro). See Figure I for location  

76_6 Geoseismic cross-section across the Horda Platform, illustrating the Tertiary post-rift evolution (with the courtesy of P. van Veen and L. J. Skjold, Norsk Hydro). See Figure 1 for location 

77_1 Figure.7. Shows the cross section AA’ 

77_2 Figure.8. Shows the cross section BB’ 

77_3 Figure.9. Shows the cross section CC’ 

77_4 Figure.10. Shows the cross section DD’ 

78_1 Figure 9-8  Breakwater with a wave power generating system

78_10 Figure 11-13  Recommended cross-section according to PIANC (1973)

78_2 Possible cross-section of semi-circular caisson breakwater for extremely high breakers

78_3 Figure 11-1  Berm breakwater with high berm

78_4 In Figure 11-4, Figure 11-5, Figure 11-6, Figure 11-7 and Figure 11-8, examples of standard cross-sections based on the considerations given in Section 11.4.2 are given. These cross-sections show the changes of the leeward slope for increasing crest level and thus for decreasing overtopping and transmission. Examples of cross-sections with a concrete cap-block are also given. This feature is rarely seen in low-crested or submerged breakwaters, probably because of the difficulty of placing the block. Figure 11-2  Berm breakwater with berm at MSL

78_5 Figure 11-4  Rubble mound breakwater – light overtopping (with cap block)

78_6 Figure 11-5  Rubble mound breakwater - light overtopping

78_7 Figure 11-6  Rubble mound breakwater - moderate overtopping

78_8 Figure 11-7  Rubble mound breakwater - moderate overtopping (with cap block)

78_9 Figure 11-8  Rubble mound breakwater - severe overtopping

79_1 Figure4. Anexampleofcomplexspatialpositionrelationshipbetweenformationsurfacesandhorizontalwells.ThehorizontalwellJY124HF has an angle of 0°–90° with formation surfaces and intersects formation surfaces Wufeng top and Jiancaogou top multiple times.

79_2 An example of type I and type II errors that could commonly occur in structural modeling using horizontal well data. Type I errors are incorrect intersection points; type II errors are incorrect distance between horizontal well section and formation surface.

79_3 Uncertainty analysis of formation dip angle and thickness in cross section of well JY8-3HF.

79_4 A cross section a long the horizontal well to show the generated cells:(A)the entire cross section of the generated cells in a correct structural model,(B)a close-up view of the cells highlighted by the red dashed rectangle in(A),and(C) the generated cells in an incorrect structural model at the same location as that in (B)

79_5 A cross section through well toshow the total organic carbon(TOC) model for Long maxi –Wu feng shalein the Fuling gas ﬁeld (A) a result using the frequency distribution function method 

79_6 A result using the trend model method. Unit for TOC is wt. %.

79_7 A cross section through well to show the shale lit ho facies model for Long maxi–Wu feng shalein the Fuling gas ﬁeld:(A) a result using the percentage method 

79_8 A result using the probability trend model method.

81_1 Simplified geological cross-section (see B for location) showing the half-grabenstructure of the Teruel Basin in the Escorihuela sector.

82_1 Geological section of the Chongón-Colonche area. Vertical exaggeration x 6. Location figure 2.2. Legend and colors figure 2.3. F3 = fault of Colonche. F4 = Cascol fault.

82_2 Geological section of the Jipijapa sector. The Jipijapa massif. Vertical exaggeration x 6. Location figure 2.2. Legend and colors figure 2.3. F4 = Cascol fault; F5 = Jipijapa fault.

82_3 Geological section of the Jama area. Vertical exaggeration x 6. Location figure 2.2. Legend and colors figure 2.3. F7 = Flavio Alvaro fault; F8 = Pichincha fault.

82_4 Geological section of the Quinindé sector. Jama's fault system. This system draws a positive flower. Vertical exaggeration x 6. Location figure 2.2. Legend and colors figure 2.3.

82_5 Geological section of the Esmeraldas sector. Vertical exaggeration x 6. Location figure 2.2. Legend and colors figure 2.3. F10 = Canandé fault; F11 = Tanigüe fault.

82_6 Geological section of the Bahia de Caráquez area. The Uniform of Tosagua. Vertical exaggeration x 6. Location figure 2.2. Legend and colors figure 2.3.

82_7 Simplified cross sections illustrating the lithologic and tectonic context along the stream profiles of the Jama and Jipijapa rivers. (a)  The  Jama river profile shows a  set of  knickpoints in downstream direction of the Jama  fault (~100 m in vertical direction) just above the outcrop of the Cretaceous rocks. At this level a great deviation from the logarithmic curve is associated the Jama fault. Note the good fit between the logarithmic curve and the river profile in the upstream direction of the Jama  fault. Vertical exaggeration of 60

82_8 The Jipijapa River profile shows a  similar lithologic and tectonic setting as the Jama River. A zone with many knickpoints is exhibited along downstream of the Jipijapa fault trace (~150 m in vertical direction) throughout the hanging wall block, where the Cretaceous rocks are exhumed. Vertical exaggeration of 25. 

83_1 Un-interpreted 2D-seismic line Hareflection shot from NE-to-SW direction intersected by well HaG1, Northern area of the study area

84_1 Geological cross-section of the Jimusar Sag (East–West).

84_2 Cross section diagram offive cored wells of the Permian Lucaogou Formation.

85_1 Seismic amplitude vertical crosssection along AA

86_1 Cross section AA’showing major statigraphic units and major tectonic features within the Dongying Depression (modified fromGuo et al., 2010).

86_2 Interpreted seismic cross section through the study area showing lithologies in the Es4 interval and major extensional faults.

87_1 Comparison of two different extreme interpretations of the active Corinth Rift andthe Naxos Oligo-Miocene metamorphic core complex. A: The Corinth Rift is controlled byone main north-dipping normal fault

87_2 The Corinth Rift is controlledby one single north-dipping detachment (Sorel, 2000); seismicity after (Lyon-Caen et al.,2004  )

87_3 Naxos metamorphic core complex afterGautier et al. (1993).

87_4 Interpretative balanced cross-sections through the Corinth Rift showing the relative positions of the movement zones observed or postulated on land(Sorel, 2000; Flotté andSorel, 2001; Flotté et al., 2005), active normal faults cutting through the decollements on the southern shore (Armijo et al., 1996), the microseismicity zone (Rigo et al., 1996; Lyon-Caen et al., 2004) close to the brittle–ductile transition and the associated focal mechanisms (Rigo et al., 1996; Bernard et al., 1997, 2006), a zone of highfluid content shown by adetailed tomographic study (Gautier et al., 2006). (A) Crustal-scale cross-section showing the three decollement levels (red lines) and the extension at depth of the brittle–ductileshear zone in the middle crust. The red dotted line is the outline of thefluid-rich zone inferred from seismic tomography (Gautier et al., 2006). (B) Details of the upper part of thesection and the relations between the Zaroukla and Cretan detachments (TB: Tyros Beds, PQ: Phyllite–Quartzite).

87_5 Restored cross-section of the upper crustal portion of the Corinth Rift. This part of the section has been balanced using the Pindos–Gavrovo–Tripolitza interface as a referenceline. All blocks between normal faults are rigid except the block north of the Tsivlos fault that has been distorted to take into account the roll-over structure.

88_1 Crustal-scale cross-sections from Turrini et al.,(2014) against the INGV earthquake dataset; black dots: instrumental hypocentres (0<M<7); red dots: historical hypocentres (M=3-–7). HPD=Hypocentre Projection Distance. Deep red dots in section ‘d’ are historical hypocentres relocatedby depth. Section ‘a’: 1=Near Top Basement; 2=Near Top Triassic; 3=top Mesozoic Carbonates; 4=Cenozoic succession; 5=Base-Pliocene unconformity; NA=Northern Apennines,Allochtonous(Allochthonous Ligurides); TPB=Tertiary Piedmont Basin sediments; LA=Ligurian Alps;SA=Southern Alps; IFZ=Insubric Fault Zone; M=Moho

88_2 Section ‘b’: 1=Northern Apennines (AllochtonousAllochthonous Ligurides); 2=Southern Alps; 3=Western+Northern Alps. 

88_3 Section ‘c’: 1=Near Top Basement; 2=Near Top Triassic; 3=top Mesozoic Carbonates; 4=Cenozoicsuccession; 5=Base-Pliocene unconformity; NA=Northern Apennines; SA=Southern Alps; v=volcanics; IEF=Inverted extensional fault.

88_4 Section ‘d’: 1=Near Top Basement; 2=Near Top Triassic; 3=top Mesozoic Carbonates; 4=Cenozoic succession; 5=Base-Pliocene unconformity;NA=Northern Apennines; SA=Southern Alps; IFZ=Insubric Fault Zone; M=Moho. See Fig.5a for location of sections. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

89_1 Facies and geometrical characteristics of a deltaic compound clinoform system in shoreline-normalcross-section (modified after Cattaneoet al., 2007 and Helland-Hansen & Hampson, 2009).

89_10 Idealized cross-sections oriented along depositional dip through the (A) northern and (B)southern parts of the Troll Field and adjoining areas (Fig. 14B)

89_11 Idealized cross-sections oriented along depositional dip through the (A) northern and (B)southern parts of the Troll Field and adjoining areas (Fig. 14B)

89_12 Idealized depositional-dip-oriented cross-sections illustrating the temporal evolution of the ‘Series 3’ subaqueous clinoform set using the compound clino-form delta model

89_13 Idealized depositional-dip-oriented cross-sections illustrating the temporal evolution of the ‘Series 3’ subaqueous clinoform set using the compound clino-form delta model

89_2 Two-dimensionalcross-section showing Holocene sand-prone delta-scale subaqueous clinoforms, offshore southern Iberia (Hernan-dez-Molinaet al., 2000); these are assumed to form by shoreface sands transported offshore by storm-drivendownwelling and along-strike currents. The geometry and size of these clinoforms are similar to those in theSognefjord Formation.

89_3 regional cross-section across the northern North Sea Basin (modified after Færseth, 1996). Chronostr.=stan-dard chronostratigraphy; High lat.=high latitude (boreal and sub-boreal) nomenclature; World.=worldwide(Tethys-based) nomenclature; N. Sea MFSs=North Sea basin-wide maximum flooding surfaces; Paly. zones=pa-lynostratigraphic zones. Position of stage boundaries and absolute ages is based on Ogget al.(2008). Names andstratigraphic positions of the basin-wide, North Sea maximum flooding surfaces are from Partingtonet al.(1993);names and positions of the palynological zones are those proposed by Dreyeret al.(2005). The five rift phasesindicated are based on the studies of Færseth & Ravnas (1998) and Ravnaset al.(2000).

89_4 Seismic cross-sections intersecting wells 31/2-10 and 31/6-2,and oriented sub-parallel to the correlation transect 

89_5 Seismic cross-sections intersecting wells 31/2-10 and 31/6-2,and oriented sub-parallel to the correlation transect 

89_6 Uninterpreted

89_7 interpreted, representative seismic cross-section showing clinoforms in thewestern part of the Troll field (located in Figs 3B and 14A). The cross-section is flattened along the interpreted J46maximum flooding surface. Westerly dipping oblique clinoforms with narrow or absent topsets and steep foreset areobserved in ‘Series 3’, between reflections labelled J46 and J52. Calculated foreset dip angles and heights of clino-forms ‘A’ to ‘H’ are shown in Fig. 10

89_8 Uninterpreted

89_9 interpreted, representative seismic cross-section showing clinoforms in thesouth-eastern part of the Troll field (located in Figs 3B and 14A). The cross-section is flattened along the inter-preted J46 maximum flooding surface. Westerly dipping sigmoidal clinoforms with well-developed topsets andrelatively gentle foreset dips are observed in both ‘Series 2’, between reflections labelled Fensfjord Formation topand J46, and ‘Series 3’, between reflections labelled J46 and J52. Calculated foreset dip angles and heights ofclinoforms ‘I’ to ‘N’ in ‘Series 3’ are shown

90_1 Chronostratigraphic NW-SE section across the Barmer basin (compiledfrom Sisodia and Singh 2000; Mathur2003; Mathur et al. 2005; Sisodia et al. 2005; Compton 2009; Dolson et al. 2015; Kothari et al. 2015; John et al. 2017). Majordepositional units with respect to geological time associated with prominent erosional events and hiatuses are presented.Deccan Eqv.pDeccan equivalent.

90_2 Schematic geological cross section (not to scale) trending SE across the Sarnu/Sarnoo hill area outcrop.Key deformational events in the Sarnu/Sarnoo hill area: large fault gouge section (a); reverse fault often associatedwith fault gouge and truncation of Ghaggar-Hakra sedimentary strata against older Early Cretaceous volcanics (b;fig. 15);listric normal faults within the lower sandstone-siltstone unit of the Ghaggar-Hakra Formation (c;fig. 14); Deccan-equivalent basalticflow intruding along the older brittle shears (d;fig. 17); prominent synsedimentary growth featureof the younger sandstone body of the Ghaggar-Hakra Formation along the ENE-trending normal fault (e;fig. 16); andDeccan-equivalent basalt intruding the Ghaggar-Hakra Formation as a sill (f;figs. 19, A10, the latter available online).Inset, stereoplot of Y- (solid points) and P- (open points) planes of NE- and NW-trending brittle shear faults identifiedalong the eastern rift shoulder (Barmer basin) in outcrops around the Sarnu/Sarno village area. Several orthogonalNW-trending faults are present. A color version of thisfigure is available online.

91_1 Qualitative SW–NE cross-section of the Solimões Basin (Brazil: A–B line marked in b highlights thepresence of multiple thick sills encompassing the entire basin.

91_2 Schematic cross-section of a volcanic basin, showing sills, dykes, pipes, and surface deposits of lava andpyroclastics. Modified fromJerramet al.(2016a).

92_1 Cross section  of  the  WCSB  (see  Figure  1  for  trace  of  cross  section)  (after  Wright  et al.  1994;  Grasby  and  Chen2005).

93_1 Comparison of schematic cross sections of (top) the precollisional Tibetan Plateau and (bottom) the modern Andes. The cross section for the Tibetan Plateau wasconstructed based on cross sections of the Gangdese retroarc thrust belt [Kapp et al., 2007b], the Nima Basin [Kapp et al., 2007a], the Qiangtang Anticlinorium [Kapp et al.,2005], the Tanggula Shan [Li et al., 2012], and isopach data from the Hoh Xil Basin [Liu et al., 2001]. The yellow shaded region above the deformed Lhasa terrane represents therelatively undeformed Linzizong volcanic cover. The mantle lithosphere shown beneath the Songpan-Ganzi and Qiangtang terranes is based on modern geophysical data[Owens and Zandt, 1997] and is speculative. The Andean cross section is modified fromMcQuarrie et al. [2005] and is taken as an east-west transect across central Bolivia.

94_1 MCS lines BGR10-316, Nares01-21A, and Nares01-21. For the locations of the lines, please refer to Figure 1. (top) The free-air gravity and magnetic dataacquired along the MCS line (solid line: free-air gravity, dashed line: magnetics). The vertical dotted line marks the tie point to line BGR10-317 (Figure 4). (bottom)A line drawing of the interpreted horizons and faults. The small insetfigure shows the sediment echosounder data from a prominent extension structure.