75_1 Figure 4B Geological cross-section (modified from Vergés, 1993) including selected and simplified magnetic anisotropy results shown in A.

75_2 FIGURE  5 Conceptual cross section (not to scale) across an imbricated thrust wedge, showing the extent of the Penetrative Strain (PES) forelandward away from the structural front, in relation to the outermost structure (modified from Lacombe and Mouthereau, 1999).

76_1 The northern North Sea palaeorift system, including the Viking and Sogn graben, is an approximately 150- 200 km wide zone of extended upper crust with pre- served strata from pre-Triassic to Tertiary. It is bounded by the Shetland Platform to the west and the Norwegian mainland to the east (Figure 1). 

76_2 Syn-rift versus early post-rift strata. Theoretically, it is easy to define the boundary between syn-rift and post-rift strata in a half-graben, because it occurs after the end of faulting and a change in the tilting of fault blocks (Figure 6). 

76_3 The transition from active stretching to thermal cooling and sediment loading should, however, lead to a trace- able change in the rotation of strata from being directed towards the platform to be directed towards the basin axis (Figure 6B). 

76_4 The reactivation of pre-existing steep faults along the graben margins may be expected in this stage, as well as the initiation of shallow listric faults in younger sediments above the older master faults (Figure 11).
Figure 11 shows an example of the commonly termed 'base Cretaceous' (so-called 'late Cimmerian') un- conformity across the Snorre Field in the northern North Sea. 

76_5 The Lomre-Uer Terrace (Figure 12) is another example of reactivation of older master faults during overall post-rift subsidence.

76_6 At this time the shoulders of the rift were supported (Joy, 1992). During latest Cretaceous and Tertiary the shoulders lost their support, producing an elongated, saucer- shaped basin and a 'steer's head' cross-sectional basin shape (Figure 13) 
In addition, uplift events can be seen on the eastern Horda Platform during late Eocene-early Oligocene and in the Miocene (Figure 13).

77_1 This  cross  section  shows  the  South  Alluvium  formationfig.7.
It  is  shows  the  five  layer  cross section  map.  First layeris  top  soil followed  by  fine  sand  forthesecond  layer that  is  maximum  occur  in the  VES  38 (Palayasevaramapuram) at 52 m and VES 44(Vengudi) at 45 m depthand  it is very good aquifer. The third layer is Highhly   weathered   rock   its   hold   in   more   water   area.   It   is   fall   on   VES   39   (Sankarampuram),   VES   42 (Pulliyampakkam), VES 43(Walajabad) and VES 47 (Villivalam).Fourth layer is Jointed Charnockite rock It is fall on VES 45(Kelaottivakkam)and VES 48(Nayakenpatai). And last layer Massive charnockite.

77_2 This cross section shows the Hard Rock formationfig.8.
It is shows the five layer cross section map. First layer is top soil followed byclayfor the second layer that is maximum occur in the VES 52 (Kaliyanor) at 5m and VES 25(Uthukadu)  at 1m  depth.  The  third  layer  is Weahered  Gneiss its  hold  in  more  water  area.  It  is  fall  on  VES 52 (Kaliyanor),  VES   61(Neikuppam).Fourth  layer  is  Jointed/FractureCharnockite   rock   It   is   fall   on   VES 61 (Kelaottivakkam) and VES 25(Uthukadu)it is maixmum 75 m thickness. And last layer Massive charnockiteit is very near  by  ground  surface  at  VES  70  (Kattavakkam).

77_3 This  cross  section  shows  the Sedimantary formationfig.9.
It  is shows the five  layer cross section map.  First layer is top soil followed  by clay for the  second layer that is maximum occur  in  the  VES 8(Alappakam)  at 20m  and  VES 73(Vedal)  at 8m  depth.  The  third  layer  is Sandy  Clay/Clayey Sandyits hold in more water area. It is fall on VES 19(Rajakulam), VES 13(Singadivakam), VES 11 (Athivakkam) and  VES 8(Alappakam)  these  area  wide  thickness  of  this  layer.  Fourth  layer  is sandy  gravelIt  is  fall  on  VES 73(Vedal) and it is maixmum 45m thickness. And last layer Boulders.

77_4 This  cross  section shows  the  North  Alluvium    formationfig.10.  It  is  shows the four  layer  cross  section  map. First layer is top soil followed by Fine Sand/Clay for the second layer that is maximum occur in the VES 86 (Pullalur) at 30 m and VES 98 (Samanthipuram) at8 m depth. The third layer is Sandy Sandy Clay/Clayey Sandy/Sandy Gravel its hold in more water area. It is fall on VES 85 (Palur), VES 87 (Pullalur), VES 88 (Thandalam), VES 89 (Purisai) and  VES 98 (Samanthipuram) these area wide thickness of third layer. And last layer Boulders it is occur VES 86 (Pullalur) near to another area.

78_1 
Many of the designs havebeen described by Tanimoto and Takahashi [1994]. Two examples of their typicaldesigns are given in Figure 9-9 and in Figure 9-10.

78_10 
This leads to a basic cross-section as sketched in Figure 11-13.This sketch can onlybe  used  as  a  first  approximation  in  a  design  and  its  stability  must  be  verifiedthoroughly for every new application.

78_2 
Many of the designs havebeen described by Tanimoto and Takahashi [1994]. Two examples of their typicaldesigns are given in Figure 9-9 and in Figure 9-10

78_3 
This leads to two frequently used basic cross-sections, one with the berm at crestlevel and one with the berm just above MSL. These two cross-sections are presentedin Figure 11-1 and Figure 11-2.

78_4 In Figure 11-4, Figure 11-5, Figure 11-6, Figure 11-7 and Figure 11-8, examples of standard cross-sections based on the considerations given in Section 11.4.2 are given. These cross-sections show the changes of the leeward slope for increasing crest level and thus for decreasing overtopping and transmission. Examples of cross-sections with a concrete cap-block are also given. This feature is rarely seen in low-crested or submerged breakwaters, probably because of the difficulty of placing the block.

Figure 11-2  Berm breakwater with berm at MSL


78_5 Figure 11-4  Rubble mound breakwater – light overtopping (with cap block)

78_6 Figure 11-5  Rubble mound breakwater - light overtopping


78_7 Figure 11-6  Rubble mound breakwater - moderate overtopping

78_8 Figure 11-7  Rubble mound breakwater - moderate overtopping (with cap block)

78_9 Figure 11-8  Rubble mound breakwater - severe overtopping

79_1 The main reason is that horizontalwells have a much more complex spatial positionrelationship with formation surfaces. Vertical wells arecommonly perpendicular or close to perpendicular tothe formation surfaces, whereas horizontal wells tryto follow the target zone in their horizontal section(Figure 4). Thus, the horizontal section of these wellscould be parallel or close to parallel to formationsurfaces or intersect with aformation surface multipletimes. One or several formation tops will repeat inhorizontal wells (e.g., Wufeng top in Figure 4).

79_2 Because of the complex relationship betweenhorizontal wells and formation surfaces, two com-mon types of errors could occur in areas close tohorizontalwells (Figure 6), which ishard toovercomeusing existing algorithms.
As shown in Figure 6, Wufeng topsurface incorrectly intersects with wellbore JY12-4HFin the right side (type I).
Theseconderrortype(typeII)isthatthein-terpreted formation surface is too far from the well-bore, resulting in remarkable thickness change offormations above and below the surface (type II inFigure 6). 
Assumption 2 was made to be a guide for dealingwith thickness changes of shale formations. A remark-able thickness change (e.g., thickness increased or de-creased by>50%) is considered as an indicator ofincorrectly interpreted formation surfaces, for example,the surface of the top of Jiancaogou Formation inFigure 6.
The picking of more formation topsin the real wells and inferring formation tops in thePVWs provides more controlling points to reduce theuncertainty of formation surfaces. This approach caneffectively avoid the two types of errors illustrated in Figure 6. 

79_3 In area C of the cross section along well JY8-3,theWufengtopandJiancaogoutophavethreeandfour data points, respectively. Therefore, it is possibleto assess their formation dip angles and formationthicknesses with little uncertainty, causing potentialinterpretations to be similar (Figure 8).

79_4 With assumption 1,the absolute location of well-penetrated cells isthe same or similar, but the relative location can bequite different in different cell systems (Figure 15).

79_5 Inaddition, the TOC model constructed by the trendmodel method was a little more continuous and closerto the vertical distribution pattern of TOC in well JY1than that constructed by the distribution functionmethod (Figure 16).

79_6  (B) a result using the trend model method. Unit for TOC is wt. %.

79_7  AcrosssectionthroughwellJY1toshowtheshalelithofaciesmodelforLongmaxi–WufengshaleintheFulinggas ﬁeld:(A) a result using the percentage method 

79_8 (B) a result using the probability trend model method.

80_1 Fig. 18.Cross section showing the lateral TOC content variations in the Sequence A (the Lower Member of the Longmaxi Formation) in the Jiaoshiba shale gasfield and its adjacentarea in southeast Sichuan Basin. SeeFig. 1for the location of the cross section.


81_1 Figure 2.11. Coupe géologique de la zone de Chongón-Colonche. Exagération vertical x 6. Localisation figure 2.2. Légende et couleurs figure 2.3. F3 = faille de Colonche. F4 = faille de Cascol.

82_1 Figure 2.11. Coupe géologique de la zone de Chongón-Colonche. Exagération vertical x 6. Localisation figure 2.2. Légende et couleurs figure 2.3. F3 = faille de Colonche. F4 = faille de Cascol.

82_2 Figure  2.12. Coupe  Géologique  secteur  Jipijapa.  Le  massif  de  Jipijapa.  Exagération  vertical  x  6.  Localisation  figure  2.2. Légende et couleurs figure 2.3. F4 = faille de Cascol; F5 = faille de Jipijapa.

82_3 Figure  2.13. Coupe  Géologique  de  la  zone  de  Jama.  Exagération  vertical  x  6.  Localisation  figure  2.2.  Légende  et  couleurs figure 2.3. F7 = faille de Flavio Alvaro; F8 = faille Pichincha.

82_4 Figure  2.14. Coupe  géologique  du  secteur  Quinindé.  Le  système  de  faille  de  Jama.  Ce  système  dessine  une  fleur  positive. Exagération verticale x 6. Localisation figure 2.2. Légende et couleurs figure 2.3. 

82_5 Figure  2.15. Coupe  géologique  du  secteur  d’Esmeraldas.  Exagération  vertical  x  6.  Localisation  figure  2.2.  Légende  et couleurs figure 2.3. F10 = faille Canandé; F11 = faille Tanigüe.

82_6 Figure  2.16. Coupe  Géologique  de  la  zone  Bahia  de  Caráquez.  L'Antiforme  de  Tosagua.  Exagération  vertical  x  6. Localisation figure 2.2. Légende et couleurs figure 2.3. 

82_7 Fig. 4.12. Simplified cross sections illustrating the lithologic and tectonic context along the stream profiles of the Jama and Jipijapa rivers. (a)  The  Jama river profile shows a  set of  knickpoints in downstream direction of the Jama  fault (~100 m in vertical direction) just above the outcrop of the Cretaceous rocks. At this level a great deviation from the logarithmic curve is associated the Jama fault. Note the good fit between the logarithmic curve and the river profile in the upstream direction of the Jama  fault. Vertical exaggeration of 60. (b) The Jipijapa River profile shows a  similar lithologic and tectonic setting as the Jama River. A zone with many knickpoints is exhibited along downstream of the Jipijapa fault trace (~150 m in vertical direction) throughout the hanging wall block, where the Cretaceous rocks are exhumed. Vertical exaggeration of 25.

82_8  (b) The Jipijapa River profile shows a  similar lithologic and tectonic setting as the Jama River. A zone with many knickpoints is exhibited along downstream of the Jipijapa fault trace (~150 m in vertical direction) throughout the hanging wall block, where the Cretaceous rocks are exhumed. Vertical exaggeration of 25. 

83_1 Figure 3.1.Un-interpreted 2D-seismic line Hareflection shot from NE-to-SW direction intersected by well HaG1, Northern area of the study area

84_1 The depocenters of the Lucaogou Formation are distributed atthe south of the Jimusar Sag, and the maximum thickness of thisformation is over 300 m (Fig. 2).

84_2 Thetypical sedimentary microfacies were deep to semi-deep waterlacustrine shale, shallow lacustrine beach bar, shallow lacustrineinterbeds of shale and siltstone, and delta front distal bar (Fig. 7).According to the analysis above, the transgressive sequences (shaleLFA) were all deep to semi-deep water environments in the Ji-musar Sag
The data from boreholes showed that the thickness ofFig. 6.Sedimentary facies analysis diagram of four cored wells.Z. Qiu et al. / Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 140 (2016) 97–107102
the LSS varied from 12–79 m (Fig. 7), with the thickest locationsbeing wells Ji 30, Ji 34, Ji 251 and Ji 36 in the southern part of thesag.

85_1 As an example in Figure1c, the west sideis downthrown at location B, whereas the east block isdownthrown at location B

86_1 DongyingDepression consists offive secondary tectonic provinces from north tosouth: the northern steep slope, the northern sag (Minfeng Sag), thecentral anticline, the southern sag (Niuzhang Sag), and the southerngentle slope (Fig. 1C)

86_2 The Es4 interval consists of dark lacustrinesource rocks, calcareous mudstones interbedded with multi-stage,sublacustrine-fan, sandy conglomerates, pebbly sandstones and sand-stones adjacent to the boundary fault (Fig. 3). Evaporites are developedat the bottom and top of Es4x and evaporitic lithologies includegypsum, anhydrite and halite (Fig. 3).

87_1 Fig. 2 Comparison of two different extreme interpretations of the active Corinth Rift andthe Naxos Oligo-Miocene metamorphic core complex. A: The Corinth Rift is controlled byone main north-dipping normal fault

87_2 B: The Corinth Rift is controlledby one single north-dipping detachment (Sorel, 2000); seismicity after (Lyon-Caen et al.,2004  )

87_3 C: Naxos metamorphic core complex afterGautier et al. (1993).

87_4 The Zaroukla decollement is cut by at least one large north-dipping normal fault rooting in the Cretan detachment (Fig. 6B).

87_5 Restoring the cross-section (Fig. 7) allows to estimate the amountof extension. Wefind 8 km for the onshore section, that is twice smallerthan inFlotté and Sorel (2001)on the same section. This differencemainly arises from our choice of totally rigid blocks between faults. Inaddition, the offshore sedimentary basin and its fault pattern have beenrestored in a way similar toSachpazi et al. (2003).Thetotalextensionthen becomes 13 km across the entire rift. If extension has started some1 Ma ago this leads to an average rate of 13 mm/year grossly compatiblewith the 1.5 cm/year measured rate (Briole et al., 2000).

88_1 Fig. 7 Crustal-scale cross-sections from Turrini et al.,(2014) against the INGV earthquake dataset; black dots: instrumental hypocentres (0<M<7); red dots: historical hypocentres (M=3-–7). HPD=Hypocentre Projection Distance. Deep red dots in section ‘d’ are historical hypocentres relocatedby depth. Section ‘a’: 1=Near Top Basement; 2=Near Top Triassic; 3=top Mesozoic Carbonates; 4=Cenozoic succession; 5=Base-Pliocene unconformity; NA=Northern Apennines,Allochtonous(Allochthonous Ligurides); TPB=Tertiary Piedmont Basin sediments; LA=Ligurian Alps;SA=Southern Alps; IFZ=Insubric Fault Zone; M=Moho

88_2 Section ‘b’: 1=Northern Apennines (AllochtonousAllochthonous Ligurides); 2=Southern Alps; 3=Western+Northern Alps. 

88_3 Section ‘c’: 1=Near Top Basement; 2=Near Top Triassic; 3=top Mesozoic Carbonates; 4=Cenozoicsuccession; 5=Base-Pliocene unconformity; NA=Northern Apennines; SA=Southern Alps; v=volcanics; IEF=Inverted extensional fault.

88_4  Section ‘d’: 1=Near Top Basement; 2=Near Top Triassic; 3=top Mesozoic Carbonates; 4=Cenozoic succession; 5=Base-Pliocene unconformity;NA=Northern Apennines; SA=Southern Alps; IFZ=Insubric Fault Zone; M=Moho. See Fig.5a for location of sections. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

89_1 Fig. 1.(A) Facies and geometrical characteristics of a deltaic compound clinoform system in shoreline-normalcross-section (modified after Cattaneoet al., 2007 and Helland-Hansen & Hampson, 2009).
Modern deltas subject to high sediment sup-ply in high-energy marine settings frequentlyexhibit  a  subaerial  clinoform  (coastal  plaindelta) and a subaqueous clinoform (subaqueousdelta) which are separated by a subaqueous plat-form (Fig. 1A)

89_10 Fig. 16.(A) and (B) Idealized cross-sections oriented along depositional dip through the (A) northern and (B)southern parts of the Troll Field and adjoining areas (Fig. 14B), illustrating the compound clinoform delta modelduring early progradation of ‘Series 3’. The subaerial delta clinoforms shown in (B) are probably lying to the eastof the study area, but have not been observed in this study. (C) to (F) Idealized depositional-dip-oriented cross-sections illustrating the temporal evolution of the ‘Series 3’ subaqueous clinoform set using the compound clino-form delta model (Fig. 15B). The model envisions westward-prograding clinoforms fed by currents flowing paral-lel to the clinoform strike. (C) During early progradation, subaqueous clinoforms prograded across the eastern partof the Troll Field (Fig. 14B). (D) Subsequently, the clinoforms continued their westward progradation onto a slop-ing sea floor, synchronous with increases in coarse-grained sediment flux and alongshore current energy(Fig. 14C). (E) Transgression is marked by abandonment of the clinoform set, and localized development of thin,upward-coarsening successions that may contain sub-seismic clinoforms in the south-east (interval between sur-faces labelled J52 TS and J52 MFS in Fig. 5A).

89_11 Fig. 16.(A) and (B) Idealized cross-sections oriented along depositional dip through the (A) northern and (B)southern parts of the Troll Field and adjoining areas (Fig. 14B), illustrating the compound clinoform delta modelduring early progradation of ‘Series 3’. The subaerial delta clinoforms shown in (B) are probably lying to the eastof the study area, but have not been observed in this study. (C) to (F) Idealized depositional-dip-oriented cross-sections illustrating the temporal evolution of the ‘Series 3’ subaqueous clinoform set using the compound clino-form delta model (Fig. 15B). The model envisions westward-prograding clinoforms fed by currents flowing paral-lel to the clinoform strike. (C) During early progradation, subaqueous clinoforms prograded across the eastern partof the Troll Field (Fig. 14B). (D) Subsequently, the clinoforms continued their westward progradation onto a slop-ing sea floor, synchronous with increases in coarse-grained sediment flux and alongshore current energy(Fig. 14C). (E) Transgression is marked by abandonment of the clinoform set, and localized development of thin,upward-coarsening successions that may contain sub-seismic clinoforms in the south-east (interval between sur-faces labelled J52 TS and J52 MFS in Fig. 5A).

89_12 C) to (F) Idealized depositional-dip-oriented cross-sections illustrating the temporal evolution of the ‘Series 3’ subaqueous clinoform set using the compound clino-form delta model

89_13 C) to (F) Idealized depositional-dip-oriented cross-sections illustrating the temporal evolution of the ‘Series 3’ subaqueous clinoform set using the compound clino-form delta model

89_2 C) Two-dimensionalcross-section showing Holocene sand-prone delta-scale subaqueous clinoforms, offshore southern Iberia (Hernan-dez-Molinaet al., 2000); these are assumed to form by shoreface sands transported offshore by storm-drivendownwelling and along-strike currents. The geometry and size of these clinoforms are similar to those in theSognefjord Formation.
The steep foresets (up to 16°) and narrow top-sets shown by the studied clinoforms, particu-larly in the west, are significantly different fromrecent muddy subaqueous deltas, but are consis-tent with delta-scale sand-rich subaqueous clino-forms (for example, Fig. 1C

89_3 (C) regional cross-section across the northern North Sea Basin (modified after Færseth, 1996). Chronostr.=stan-dard chronostratigraphy; High lat.=high latitude (boreal and sub-boreal) nomenclature; World.=worldwide(Tethys-based) nomenclature; N. Sea MFSs=North Sea basin-wide maximum flooding surfaces; Paly. zones=pa-lynostratigraphic zones. Position of stage boundaries and absolute ages is based on Ogget al.(2008). Names andstratigraphic positions of the basin-wide, North Sea maximum flooding surfaces are from Partingtonet al.(1993);names and positions of the palynological zones are those proposed by Dreyeret al.(2005). The five rift phasesindicated are based on the studies of Færseth & Ravnas (1998) and Ravnaset al.(2000).
The Horda Platform is an up to 50 km wide,north–south  trending,  normal  fault-boundedblock  (Fig. 2C)

89_4 (C) and (D) Seismic cross-sections intersecting wells 31/2-10 and 31/6-2,and oriented sub-parallel to the correlation transect 

89_5 (C) and (D) Seismic cross-sections intersecting wells 31/2-10 and 31/6-2,and oriented sub-parallel to the correlation transect 

89_6 Fig. 9.(A) Uninterpreted and (B) interpreted, representative seismic cross-section showing clinoforms in thewestern part of the Troll field (located in Figs 3B and 14A). The cross-section is flattened along the interpreted J46maximum flooding surface. Westerly dipping oblique clinoforms with narrow or absent topsets and steep foreset areobserved in ‘Series 3’, between reflections labelled J46 and J52. Calculated foreset dip angles and heights of clino-forms ‘A’ to ‘H’ are shown in Fig. 10. (C) Reconstructed geomorphology and structure at time of deposition. The J46datum surface is assigned a geomorphological shape based on the height and distribution of underlying clinoforms,and facies associations inferred by extrapolation from nearby cored wells 31/5-2 and 31/2-1. This interpretationimplies fault-related thickening during the deposition of the Late Callovian ‘Heather B’ unit (Series 2); however, faultactivity had ceased by the time that the sandstones of the lower Sognefjord Formation started to be deposited. The topset to foreset portion of clinoforms inthe south-east of the Troll Field area is com-posed largely of well-sorted, hummocky cross-stratified,  fine-grained  sandstones  (FA2  andFA3), whereas the foreset to bottomset portion iscomposed of offshore siltstones (FA1) (Fig. 10).An important inference derived from this faciescomposition is that these clinothems accumu-lated below fair-weather wave base. Towards thewest, however, the whole clinoform foreset iscomposed of well-sorted, cross-bedded, fine tocoarse-grained sandstones (FA4) (Fig. 9); thissuggests that they accumulated in an environ-ment that was continuously reworked by strongcurrents,  either  above or below fair-weatherwave base.

89_7 Fig. 9.(A) Uninterpreted and (B) interpreted, representative seismic cross-section showing clinoforms in thewestern part of the Troll field (located in Figs 3B and 14A). The cross-section is flattened along the interpreted J46maximum flooding surface. Westerly dipping oblique clinoforms with narrow or absent topsets and steep foreset areobserved in ‘Series 3’, between reflections labelled J46 and J52. Calculated foreset dip angles and heights of clino-forms ‘A’ to ‘H’ are shown in Fig. 10. (C) Reconstructed geomorphology and structure at time of deposition. The J46datum surface is assigned a geomorphological shape based on the height and distribution of underlying clinoforms,and facies associations inferred by extrapolation from nearby cored wells 31/5-2 and 31/2-1. This interpretationimplies fault-related thickening during the deposition of the Late Callovian ‘Heather B’ unit (Series 2); however, faultactivity had ceased by the time that the sandstones of the lower Sognefjord Formation started to be deposited.The topset to foreset portion of clinoforms inthe south-east of the Troll Field area is com-posed largely of well-sorted, hummocky cross-stratified,  fine-grained  sandstones  (FA2  andFA3), whereas the foreset to bottomset portion iscomposed of offshore siltstones (FA1) (Fig. 10).An important inference derived from this faciescomposition is that these clinothems accumu-lated below fair-weather wave base. Towards thewest, however, the whole clinoform foreset iscomposed of well-sorted, cross-bedded, fine tocoarse-grained sandstones (FA4) (Fig. 9); thissuggests that they accumulated in an environ-ment that was continuously reworked by strongcurrents,  either  above or below fair-weatherwave base.

89_8 Fig. 10.(A) Uninterpreted and (B) interpreted, representative seismic cross-section showing clinoforms in thesouth-eastern part of the Troll field (located in Figs 3B and 14A). The cross-section is flattened along the inter-preted J46 maximum flooding surface. Westerly dipping sigmoidal clinoforms with well-developed topsets andrelatively gentle foreset dips are observed in both ‘Series 2’, between reflections labelled Fensfjord Formation topand J46, and ‘Series 3’, between reflections labelled J46 and J52. Calculated foreset dip angles and heights ofclinoforms ‘I’ to ‘N’ in ‘Series 3’ are shown. (C) Reconstructed geomorphology and structure at time of deposition,with facies associations inferred by extrapolation from nearby cored wells 31/6-8, 31/6-1, 31/6-5 and 31/6-2.The topset to foreset portion of clinoforms inthe south-east of the Troll Field area is com-posed largely of well-sorted, hummocky cross-stratified,  fine-grained  sandstones  (FA2  andFA3), whereas the foreset to bottomset portion iscomposed of offshore siltstones (FA1) (Fig. 10).

89_9 Fig. 10.(A) Uninterpreted and (B) interpreted, representative seismic cross-section showing clinoforms in thesouth-eastern part of the Troll field (located in Figs 3B and 14A). The cross-section is flattened along the inter-preted J46 maximum flooding surface. Westerly dipping sigmoidal clinoforms with well-developed topsets andrelatively gentle foreset dips are observed in both ‘Series 2’, between reflections labelled Fensfjord Formation topand J46, and ‘Series 3’, between reflections labelled J46 and J52. Calculated foreset dip angles and heights ofclinoforms ‘I’ to ‘N’ in ‘Series 3’ are shown. (C) Reconstructed geomorphology and structure at time of deposition,with facies associations inferred by extrapolation from nearby cored wells 31/6-8, 31/6-1, 31/6-5 and 31/6-2.The topset to foreset portion of clinoforms inthe south-east of the Troll Field area is com-posed largely of well-sorted, hummocky cross-stratified,  fine-grained  sandstones  (FA2  andFA3), whereas the foreset to bottomset portion iscomposed of offshore siltstones (FA1) (Fig. 10).

90_1 Figure 2 presents a Wheeler diagram of a chro-nostratigraphic section, taking into account the avail-able stratigraphicinformationfromcurrentliterature(Sisodia and Singh 2000; Mathur 2003; Mathur et al.2005; Sisodia et al. 2005; Compton 2009; Beaumontet al. 2015; Dolson et al. 2015; Kothari et al. 2015).

90_2 Figure 13.Schematic geological cross section (not to scale) trending SE across the Sarnu/Sarnoo hill area outcrop.Key deformational events in the Sarnu/Sarnoo hill area: large fault gouge section (a); reverse fault often associatedwith fault gouge and truncation of Ghaggar-Hakra sedimentary strata against older Early Cretaceous volcanics (b;fig. 15);listric normal faults within the lower sandstone-siltstone unit of the Ghaggar-Hakra Formation (c;fig. 14); Deccan-equivalent basalticflow intruding along the older brittle shears (d;fig. 17); prominent synsedimentary growth featureof the younger sandstone body of the Ghaggar-Hakra Formation along the ENE-trending normal fault (e;fig. 16); andDeccan-equivalent basalt intruding the Ghaggar-Hakra Formation as a sill (f;figs. 19, A10, the latter available online).Inset, stereoplot of Y- (solid points) and P- (open points) planes of NE- and NW-trending brittle shear faults identifiedalong the eastern rift shoulder (Barmer basin) in outcrops around the Sarnu/Sarnoo village area. Several orthogonalNW-trending faults are present. A color version of thisfigure is available online.

91_1 Fig. 5.(a) Qualitative SW–NE cross-section of the Solimões Basin (Brazil: A–B line marked in b highlights thepresence of multiple thick sills encompassing the entire basin.

91_2 The importance of volcanic basins for the evolu-tion of LIPs and the relationship to environmentalchanges has been stressed in recent years. Duringthe  formation  of  LIPs,  magma  is  commonlyemplaced as sills, dykes and igneous centres in theupper crust (Jerram & Bryan 2015). In cases wherethe volume of magma emplaced in sedimentarybasins is high, these basins are commonly referredto as‘volcanic basins’(Fig. 10) (e.g.Jerram 2015;Abdelmalaket al.2016; Jerramet al.2016a). Volca-nic basins are present along rifted continental mar-gins and on lithospheric cratons (e.g.Coffin&Eldholm 1994), and represent vast basin areas thatcontain significant volumes of LIP-related igneousrocks and, in some cases, particularly where under-plating has occurred and sill complexes exist, theintrusive component can be larger than the extrusivecounterparts (basalt/lava) and pyroclastic deposits.Sill emplacement is characterized by the develop-ment of hydrothermal vent complexes that cut upthrough the basin and erupt at the surface throughpipe structures (e.g.Fig. 10)(Svensenet al.2006;Jerramet al.2016a) that can be found both beforeand within the volcanic pile and which can indicatethe relative timing of the sill emplacement (e.g.Ang-kasaet al.2017).

92_1 Figure 2.  Cross  section  of  the  WCSB  (see  Figure  1  for  trace  of  cross  section)  (after  Wright  et al.  1994;  Grasby  and  Chen2005).

93_1 Several similarities can be drawn between the precollisional tectonic setting of theTibetan Plateau and of the modern Altiplano-Puna Plateau [England and Searle, 1986;Kapp et al., 2005;Lippert et al., 2014], where eastward subduction of the Nazca Plate has resulted in thickened SouthAmerican lithosphere and an associated high-elevation mountain belt and plateau (Figure 2).

94_1 Similar to the combinedNW-SE line (Figure 3), we can observe a seafloor with three terrace-like levels in the NNE (Figure 4). The areawhere sediment horizons can be observed correlates with the area where seismic velocities are in the rangeof 2400–2900 ms1. SSW of SP2000vpincrease to 4800 ms1and SSW of SP2850 further to 5500 ms1similaras already observed in the eastern part of the line BGR10-316 (Figure 2d).The free-air gravity is negative all over the Kane Basin area. The maximum values of75 mGal occur on theeastern slope of the bathymetric depression (SP1-200, line BGR10-316) near Inglefield Land (Figure 3). Towardthe tilted sedimentary basin, the free-air gravity declines further to a level of140 mGal. On line BGR10-317(Figure 4) the free-air gravity also decreases considerably to the northwest, similar to line BGR10-316 (Figure 3).
Toward the central part of the Kane Basin the seafloor rises to a plateauwith an average water depth of approximately 200 m. Line BGR10-316 (Figure 3) crosses the Kane Basin fromSE to NW. From SP1 to SP1700 no internal layers can be resolved, neither by MCS nor by sonobuoy data. Raytracing shows a unit with very highvpof approximately 4800 to 6000 m s1directly below the seafloor. High-resolution sediment echosounder data suggest that small kinks observed in the MCS data are caused byextensional normal faulting of the high-velocity unit (see inset in Figure 3), possibly a result of postglacialrebound. 

94_2 (Figure 3). (middle) A line drawing of the interpreted horizonsand faults. Note the change of the seafloor topography from the northern part of the line to the southern part. (bottom) The results of the ray tracing of sonobuoysdata and selected shot gathers. Areas with low ray coverage are shaded.

94_3 The transition from the Cretaceous-Cenozoic unit to the Paleoproterozoic unit spreadsover a long distance because we cross the boundary obliquely. Line BGR10-317 is subparallel to the easternlimit of the Franklin Pierce Basin (Figure 5).

95_1 Laterally  from  south  to  north  (Fig.2)  and from  northeast  to  northwest-north  (Fig.3);  the  Lower  Acacus  sandstones  comprise  proximal  foreland fluvial channel deposits include conglomerates and sandstones (Af1-Af9 units).

95_2 Laterally  from  south  to  north  (Fig.2)  and from  northeast  to  northwest-north  (Fig.3);  the  Lower  Acacus  sandstones  comprise  proximal  foreland fluvial channel deposits include conglomerates and sandstones (Af1-Af9 units)..

95_3 N-S  structural  cross section  (Fig.14) is  showing  the  structural style  characterizingthe  Lower  Acacus sandstone fairway. To the north and at the vicinity of NC2, NC3, NC4 and NC5 concessions, normal faulting,  associated  folding  along  with  the  development  of  good  quality  coastal-deltaic  lobes  are evident at Lower Acacus level. These faultsappear to be associated with older basement rocks in the basin and  are  thus  considered  to  be  the  effect  of reactivation  of  older  structures  at  Mesozoic  or  later age.  in  the  vicinity  of  NC7A  concession,  fluvial  channel  sandstones  of    poor  reservoir  qualitywere dominating  the  area.  Also,  reverse  faults  are  observed  and  display  up  to  100-150ft  of  vertical  offset, they  are  generally  strike  parallel  to  the  margins  of  the  Silurian  paleo-basins  and  may  show  some genetic relationship.