                           PUBLICATIONS
Tectonics
RESEARCH ARTICLE                              Reconstruction of the Exhumed Mantle Across the North
10.1002/2017TC004716
                                              Iberian Margin by Crustal-Scale 3-D Gravity
Key Points:
• 3-D lithospheric-scale gravity
                                              Inversion and Geological Cross Section
  inversion demands the presence of a         A. Pedrera1 , J. García-Senz1, C. Ayala1,2           , A. Ruiz-Constán1       , L. R. Rodríguez-Fernández1             ,
  high-density mantle body placed
  within the crust                            A. Robador1, and L. González Menéndez1
• Exhumed mantle extends beneath the          1
  Basque-Cantabrian Basin and along            Instituto Geológico y Minero de España (IGME, Madrid, Spain, 2Now visiting at the Institute of Earth Sciences Jaume
  the northern side of the Pyrenees           Almera-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain
• A major south-dipping ramp-ﬂat-ramp
  extensional detachment active
  between Valanginian and early
  Cenomanian times controlled rifting         Abstract      Recent models support the view that the Pyrenees were formed after the inversion of a
  and mantle exhumation                       previously highly extended continental crust that included exhumed upper mantle rocks. Mantle rocks
                                              remain near to the surface after compression and mountain building, covered by the latest Cretaceous to
                                              Paleogene sequences. 3-D lithospheric-scale gravity inversion demands the presence of a high-density
Correspondence to:                            mantle body placed within the crust in order to justify the observed anomalies. Exhumed mantle, having
A. Pedrera,                                   ~50 km of maximum width, continuously extends beneath the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and along the
a.pedrera@igme.es
                                              northern side of the Pyrenees. The association of this body with rift, postrift, and inversion structural
                                              geometries is tested in a balanced cross section across the Basque-Cantabrian Basin that incorporates a major
Citation:                                     south-dipping ramp-ﬂat-ramp extensional detachment active between Valanginian and early Cenomanian
Pedrera, A., García-Senz, J., Ayala, C.,
                                              times. Results indicate that horizontal extension progressed ~48 km at variable strain rates that increased
Ruiz-Constán, A., Rodríguez-Fernández,
L. R., Robador, A., & González Menéndez, L.   from 1 to ~4 mm/yr in middle Albian times. Low-strength Triassic Keuper evaporites and mudstones above
(2017). Reconstruction of the exhumed         the basement favor the decoupling of the cover with formation of minibasins, expulsion rollovers, and
mantle across the North Iberian Margin
                                              diapirs. The inversion of the extensional system is accommodated by doubly verging basement thrusts due
by crustal-scale 3-D gravity inversion
and geological cross section. Tectonics,      to the reactivation of the former basin bounding faults in Eocene-Oligocene times. Total shortening is
36, 3155–3177. https://doi.org/10.1002/       estimated in ~34 km and produced the partial subduction of the continental lithosphere beneath the two
2017TC004716
                                              sides of the exhumed mantle. Obtained results help to pinpoint the original architecture of the North Iberian
                                              Margin and the evolution of the hyperextended aborted intracontinental basins.
Received 3 JUL 2017
Accepted 14 NOV 2017
Accepted article online 23 NOV 2017
Published online 18 DEC 2017                  1. Introduction
                                              Mantle-derived rocks can be exhumed along magma-poor rift systems prior to the formation of oceanic
                                              crust (e.g., Brun & Beslier, 1996). Such exhumed mantle domains have been recognized for a long time in
                                              the rifted margins of the Atlantic Ocean and their evolution modeled (e.g., Bayrakci et al., 2016; Boillot
                                              et al., 1980, 1989; Le Pichon & Sibuet, 1981; Pérez-Gussinyé & Reston, 2001; Ranero & Perez-Gussinyé, 2010;
                                              Reston, 1996; Whitmarsh et al., 1998, 2001). Deformation processes behind the conﬁguration of asymmetric
                                              margins leading to crustal breakup and mantle exhumation are discussed. Extreme crustal thinning is
                                              explained by distributed upper-crustal normal faults acting sequentially in time, accompanied by ductile
                                              deformation of the lower crust, and subsequent lower-crust embrittlement (Brune et al., 2014, 2017;
                                              Pérez-Gussinyé, 2013; Ranero & Perez-Gussinyé, 2010; Reston & McDermot, 2011) or by slip on a master
                                              extensional detachment cross-cutting the whole crust and reaching the mantle lithosphere (e.g., Brun &
                                              Beslier, 1996; Huismans & Beaumont, 2005; Lavier & Manatschal, 2006; Manatschal et al., 2001;
                                              Manatschal, 2004; Reston, 1996). The revival of simple shear models producing drastic crustal thinning,
                                              now termed the hyperextension model, has renewed the focus on the Early Cretaceous processes inducing
                                              mantle exhumation and basin development in the northern margin of the Iberian plate that have been
                                              classically explained under a left-lateral transtensional scenario (e.g., Choukroune et al., 1973; Debroas,
                                              1987, 1990). The presence of exhumed mantle pieces in the Pyrenees and Cantabrian Mountain allows
                                              the comparison of the rifting model proposed for the Atlantic with an onshore analogue (e.g., Boillot,
                                              1986; Clerc & Lagabrielle, 2014; Teixell et al., 2016; Tugend et al., 2014). However, it is important to note
                                              that spreading stopped in the narrow intracontinental basins of the North Iberian Margin. Therefore, man-
©2017. American Geophysical Union.            tle exhumation mechanisms and deformation rates could differ from those occurring at passive margins
All Rights Reserved.                          with full developed oceanic crust. The geophysical signature of derived-mantle rocks together with the


PEDRERA ET AL.                                             MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                              3155
                               Tectonics                                                                                         10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 1. Tectonic setting of the North Iberian Margin. (a) Inset showing the Iberian Peninsula in the framework of the Central Atlantic and the Bay of Biscay. The
number refers to the age of the oceanic crust in millions of years. Exhumed mantle along the Iberian margins in black and continental crust in grey.
(b) Geological map of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and the Pyrenees with locations of Figures 2, 4, 5, and 6. Location of Figure 1b is framed.



                                         stratigraphic architecture of linked sedimentary basins provide a record of the processes behind mantle
                                         exhumation and lithosphere breakup.
                                         The aim of this paper is to examine the geometry of exhumed mantle along the North Iberian Margin.
                                         Departing from a previous Moho topography recently established from receiver-function data (Mancilla &
                                         Diaz, 2015) and newly compiled onshore Bouguer anomaly data, high-density bodies have been delineated
                                         using 3-D gravity inversion and interpreted as ultramaﬁc mantle rocks. A crustal-scale geological section
                                         across the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and the mantle body is proposed based on ﬁeldwork, seismic reﬂection,
                                         and deep-borehole data. Finally, cross-section restoration permits us to explain the sequential evolution of
                                         the rift basin and to calculate strain rates.


                                         2. Geological Setting
                                         Permian-Triassic and Early Cretaceous rifting events successively induced lithosphere thinning and basin
                                         formation between the European and Iberian plates. Triassic deposits show variations in thickness linked
                                         to WNW-ESE to E-W trending normal faults including basic hypabyssal igneous rocks (e.g., Espina, 1997;
                                         Espina et al., 2004; García-Mondéjar et al., 1986) (Figure 1). The main rifting event leads to oceanic crust
                                         formation in the Bay of Biscay and crustal breakup between the Iberia and Eurasian plates in Early Cretaceous
                                         (e.g., Boillot, 1986) (Figure 1a). Several segmented Lower Cretaceous extensional basins formed, being
                                         the Basque-Cantabrian and the Mauleòn-Arzacq the most important regarding their sedimentary
                                         thickness (Figures 1b and 2). Mantle lherozlitic bodies emplaced during late Albian and early Cenomanian
                                         are in close spatial relationship with these basins (e.g., Fabriès et al., 1998). Alkaline magmatism (e.g.,
                                         Fernández-Mendiola & García-Mondéjar, 1995; Castañares et al., 2001) and high-temperature metamorphism
                                         also occurred adjacent to the North Pyrenean and Leitza fault zones (Figure 1), partly concomitant with man-
                                         tle exhumation (e.g., Clerc et al., 2013; Lagabrielle et al., 2010). As previously mentioned, the mechanism
                                         behind the formation of the basins and the process driving mantle exhumation have been long debated
                                         issues. They have been interpreted as pull-apart basins developed in a strike-slip setting (Choukroune
                                         et al., 1973; Debroas, 1987, 1990; Peybernk & Soquet, 1984; García-Mondéjar et al., 1996), as back-arc basins
                                         linked to the subduction of a north-dipping oceanic slab beneath the Eurasian plate (Sibuet et al., 2004;


PEDRERA ET AL.                                         MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                              3156
                 Tectonics                                                                                    10.1002/2017TC004716




                     Figure 2. Geological map of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin with the location of the cross section (heavy orange line), seismic
                     lines (thin red lines), and boreholes. The three parts of the cross section shown in Figures 8–10 are also marked. The
                     encircled letters A to K refer to main faults. The marked Leitza-Gernika extensional detachment (LGD) corresponds to
                     exposure of aligned shallow faults above main breakaway faults.


                     Vissers et al., 2016), and as Lower Cretaceous rift basins last evolved in hyperextension (e.g., Boillot, 1986;
                     Jammes et al., 2009; Ferrer et al., 2008; Lagabrielle et al., 2010; Tugend et al., 2014). Previous
                     hyperextension models propose that mantle exhumation and the development of Lower Cretaceous
                     sedimentary basins are linked to a continuous extensional detachment dipping to the north crossing the
                     Basque-Cantabrian Basin, which is connected with the North Pyrenean Fault along the Pamplona left


PEDRERA ET AL.                     MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                               3157
                 Tectonics                                                                            10.1002/2017TC004716



                     stepping transfer fault zone (Roca et al., 2011; Tugend et al., 2014). The dipping sense of the master detach-
                     ment will be discussed extensively next.
                     The tectonic inversion of this stretched crust produced the Pyrenean-Cantabrian Orogen that comprised the
                     Pyrenees and the Cantabrian Mountains (e.g., Pulgar et al., 1996; Rodríguez-Fernández et al., 2015) (Figure 1).
                     A ﬁrst latest Cretaceous collisional event was proposed in the Pyrenees and was recorded by upper Santonian
                     synorogenic units at the front of the Bóixols thrust sheet (e.g., Papon, 1969; Garrido-Megías, 1973; Muñoz,
                     1992; García-Senz, 2002; Vergés et al., 1995; Vergés & García-Senz, 2001; Teixell, 1998; Mouthereau et al.,
                     2014). After a Paleocene quiet period, the main contraction started in Eocene-Oligocene times (e.g.,
                     Muñoz, 1992; Mouthereau et al., 2014). The crustal structure of the Pyrenees was formed by doubly verging
                     thrusts roughly trending E-W and rooted into a variscan basement that was uplifted within the hinterland
                     (e.g., Fitzgerald et al., 1999; Muñoz, 1992). Thrusts propagated toward the forelands, producing the inversion
                     of the former extensional basins. At lithospheric scale, the Iberian plate subducted beneath the European
                     plate (Gallastegui et al., 2002; Muñoz, 2002; Pedreira et al., 2007). Shortening is estimated around 150 km
                     in the central sector of the Pyrenees (Beaumont et al., 2000; Muñoz, 1992), 75–80 km in the western
                     Pyrenean section (Teixell, 1998), and 96 to 86 km in the central part of the Cantabrian Mountains and the
                     attached continental margin (Gallastegui, 2000; Gallastegui et al., 2002; Pedreira et al., 2007). Extensional
                     structuration is the dominant style in the Basque-Cantabrian Basin that was only moderately inverted during
                     the contraction. It is therefore an exceptional place to link the geometry of the basin with the lithospheric
                     structure. Despite this, the amount of extension and compression has not been satisfactorily estimated
                     to date.

                     3. Stratigraphy
                     The sedimentary record in the extensional Basque-Cantabrian Basin started with a Permo-Triassic sequence
                     that enclosed, from bottom to top, Buntsandstein continental sandstones, mudstones, and conglomerates;
                     highly disrupted Muschelkalk carbonates; and widespread Keuper marine variegated mudstones, gypsum,
                     and evaporites (Figures 2 and 3). This syn-rift sequence is sealed by a continuous Lower-Upper Jurassic
                     (Hettangian-Kimmeridgian) carbonate platform.
                     The Cretaceous sedimentary record has been grouped into four depositional sequences (C1 to C4) consider-
                     ing their nature, spatial distribution, and the extension rate behind their formation. The C1 sequence is com-
                     posed of continental to shallow-water limestones of Tithonian-middle Valanginian age (Valle de Ata Fm;
                     Pujalte, 1977). The C2 sequence, Valanginian to middle Albian in age, begins with transitional-shallow marine
                     black shale interlayered with ﬁne-grained sandstone and siltstone beds restricted to the basin axis (Villaro
                     Fm). Immediately above, lower Aptian delta to estuary sandstones (Eretza Fm) are in transition to shallow
                     marine shales and marls toward the northern margin of the basin (Errenaga Fm). Shallow water carbonate
                     platforms (Galdamez and Otoio Fms) occupy wide areas encompassing the Bilbao and Biscay anticlines in
                     the beginning of late Aptian. Upper Aptian-lower Albian carbonate platforms (Ason Fm) continued along
                     the Bilbao and Biscay anticlines culminating into isolated reefal systems (e.g., Ramales platform). These plat-
                     forms are laterally linked to basinal marls and deepwater terrigenous clastics (Miera, Bilbao, and Cuadro Fms.).
                     The C3 sequence is a terrigenous depositional system separated from the previous one by a widespread
                     middle Albian hiatus (García-Mondéjar et al., 2004). Continental terrigenous deposits (Utrillas and Albatros
                     Fms) expanded over the basin margins. A thick body of deltaic to shallow marine siliciclastic sediments
                     occupied the southern part of the basin (Valmaseda Fm). Toward the north, black shale, sandstone lobe beds,
                     conglomeratic feeder channels, and slope apron deposits cover the basin axis and the northern margin (Deba
                     Fm). In the Biscay synclinorium, effusive calc-alkaline submarine volcanic rocks (Errigoiti Fm) are interbedded
                     within the Deba Fm and persisted up to lower Santonian times (Castañares et al., 2001; Castañares &
                     Robles, 2004).
                     The Cenomanian to Campanian C4 sequence is characterized by shallow-marine sediments with an overall
                     transgressive evolution. A continuous thin carbonate platform (Gaviota Fm) covered the northern margin
                     of the basin while alternating marl-limestone bedded series dominated the basin axis (Calcareous Flysch)
                     and the southern margin (Arceniega, Zuazo, Subijana, and Olazagutía Fms). Immediately above, middle
                     Campanian to Maastrichtian hemipelagic marls and limestones (Zumaia Fm) covered the northern margin
                     evolving to calcareous turbidites to the north (Detritic Calcareous Flysch).


PEDRERA ET AL.                   MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                      3158
                             Tectonics                                                                                  10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 3. Wheeler diagram showing the age and correlation of sedimentary formations and sequences (SQ) between the ﬁve structural/stratigraphic domains
recognized within the Basque-Cantabrian Basin. The vertical bars indicate periods of minibasin formation.



                                      Shallow water carbonate platforms and a narrow talus give pace to a hemipelagic starved basin that
                                      occupies all the northern sectors during the Paleocene (Pujalte et al., 1993). Synorogenic Eocene to middle
                                      Oligocene turbiditic siliciclastic deposits covered the Biscay Syncline and the northern limb of the Biscay anti-
                                      clinorium and the Landes Platform, while continental series are preserved in the nucleus of the Miranda-
                                      Treviño syncline.


                                      4. 3-D Gravity Inversion
                                      4.1. Data and Inversion Procedure
                                      Previous gravity inversion results from the Bay of Biscay to the onshore Parentis and Arzacq basins (Tugend
                                      et al., 2014) are completed in our new model that covers the Pyrenees and the Basque-Cantabrian Basin. The
                                      model has been constructed using onshore Bouguer anomaly data compiled by Ayala et al. (2016) and off-
                                      shore free air anomaly data coming from Sandwell et al. (2013). To obtain the offshore Bouguer anomaly
                                      map, the effect of the bathymetry was subtracted using the 30 arc s General Bathymetric Chart of the
                                      Oceans grid. Onshore and offshore Bouguer anomaly data were merged into a 2 km grid covering the study
                                      area using 2.67 g/cm3 as the reference crustal density.
                                      The Bouguer anomaly contains the combined effect of deep and shallow lithosphere features (Figure 4).
                                      Typically, long wavelengths are associated to variations in the Moho and the lithosphere-asthenosphere
                                      boundary depth, whereas medium-to-short wavelengths are correlated with lateral density variations at


PEDRERA ET AL.                                     MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                      3159
                             Tectonics                                                                                   10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 4. Gravity and magnetic anomalies in the North Iberian Margin. (a) Bouguer anomaly map combining onshore ﬁeld-based data (Ayala et al., 2016) and
offshore satellite data (Sandwell et al., 2013). (b) Magnetic anomaly map from the EMAG2: Earth Magnetic Anomaly Grid (2 arc min resolution).



                                      crustal levels. The obtained Bouguer anomaly shows positive values of up to 120 mGal in the Bay of Biscay
                                      that decrease toward the coast. Onshore, the anomaly ranges between 120 mGal in the Axial Zone of
                                      the Pyrenees and 30 mGal in the Mauleòn-Arzacq Basin and the northern sector of the Basque-Cantabrian
                                      Basin. A medium wavelength elongated positive anomaly extends ~100 km from the Ajo Cape toward the
                                      ESE crossing the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and the Mauleòn-Arzacq Basin (Figures 2 and 4a).
                                      (i) Isolation of the medium wavelength elongated positive anomaly
                                      To remove the gravity effect of Mesozoic and Tertiary sediments and the gravity effect of the remainder crust
                                      assigned to a different density distribution (Figure 5), we have used the GMSYS-3D© commercial software
                                      that calculates the gravity response (forward modeling and inversion) in the wave number domain using
                                      the Parker algorithm (Blakely et al., 2000; Parker, 1972). The geometry of the input 3-D models is deﬁned
                                      by 2 km × 2 km grids, and the model is extended by 50% to avoid edge effects. The modeled surfaces deﬁne
                                      the top layer and the corresponding physical properties (density in our case) that can be speciﬁed by a con-
                                      stant, vertical depth-density relationship relative to one of the model horizons or lateral varying density.
                                      The thickness of Tertiary and Mesozoic sedimentary deposits has been estimated with deep boreholes and
                                      seismic data (Arenillas-González et al., 2014). A lineal density variation from 2.30 to 2.50 g/cm3 was


PEDRERA ET AL.                                     MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                       3160
                                Tectonics                                                                                          10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 5. Isolation of the medium wavelength elongated positive gravity anomaly that extends along the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and the Pyrenees. (a) Bouguer
anomaly map. (b) Calculated forward gravity anomaly of the crust including the effect of the sedimentary layers. Moho geometry was calculated using receiver
function data (Mancilla & Diaz, 2015), and thickness of the Tertiary and Mesozoic cover was taken from Arenillas-González et al. (2014). (c) Crustal residual gravity
anomaly obtained after subtraction of the forward gravity anomaly of the crust to the Bouguer anomaly map.



                                         assigned to the Tertiary and 2.50 to 2.65 g/cm3 to the Mesozoic during 3-D forward modeling in order to
                                         calculate their gravimetric response. Subsequently, we calculated the gravity contribution of the remainder
                                         crustal rocks using the crustal thickness recently obtained from receiver function data (Mancilla & Diaz,
                                         2015) as a primary input geometrical model. The Moho geometry derived from receiver functions analysis


PEDRERA ET AL.                                          MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                               3161
                 Tectonics                                                                           10.1002/2017TC004716



                     was only modiﬁed in speciﬁc sectors where the modeled gravity shows strong inconsistencies with the
                     observed gravity data. For example, an isolated seismic station indicated a thick crust (~49 km) in the Ajo
                     Cape sector. This point has been removed due to the nearby seismic stations displaying a 40 to 39 km thick
                     crust, and there is no gravity response linked to this “local crustal root” of 49 km. Another modiﬁcation has
                     been made in the crustal thickness beneath the Ebro and Aquitaine basins, where the gravity model already
                     predicts thinner values than the 39–35 km in accordance with previous lithospheric gravity modeling (Torne
                     et al., 2015). The gravimetric response of the modiﬁed crust ﬁts the observed gravity data except from along
                     the area of medium wavelength positive anomalies. A linear depth-density variation from 2.67 at surface to
                     2.95 g/cm3 at 50 km was assumed during 3-D forward modeling based on already published seismic data
                     (e.g., Pedreira et al., 2015; Torne et al., 2015). By subtracting the calculated forward gravity anomaly of the
                     crust from the Bouguer anomaly, including the sedimentary layers, the crustal residual gravity anomaly is
                     thus obtained (Figure 5). Finally, this obtained crustal residual anomaly, characterized by its elongated shape
                     and values between 30 and 70 mGal, was used as observed data in the inversion to estimate the geometry of
                     the dense body responsible for these anomalies.
                     (ii) Inversion of the crustal residual gravity anomalies
                     The geometry of the high-density body located within the crust is constrained using 3-D gravity inversion. As
                     a ﬁrst step, 10 parallel 2-D forward gravity models crossing the anomaly were constructed. An initial 3-D
                     surface was derived from interpolating the boundary of the high-density body obtained in the 2-D gravity
                     models using minimum curvature. This initial surface was later modiﬁed using 3-D gravity inversion, assign-
                     ing a constant density of 2.9 g/cm3 to the high-density body and preserving the geometry and density
                     distribution of the crust that resulted from step 2 (Figures 6 and 7).
                     The difference between the observed and calculated gravity, called “gravity error,” displays small amplitude
                     anomalies, between 5 and 5 mGal, in the area that corresponds to the assumed location of the high density
                     body, whereas outside that area, the “gravity error” displays high amplitude anomalies (between 40 and
                     25 mGal) that can be attributed to lateral density variations within the crust that were not taken into account
                     when deﬁning the density of the crust in step 2. Therefore, we have inverted this “gravity error” maintaining
                     the geometry of the high-density body and the base of the crust allowing the inversion algorithm to laterally
                     modify the lateral average crustal density. After this inversion, the “gravity error” ranges mainly between 2.5
                     and 2.5 mGal with local anomalies of higher value and very short wavelength that can be attributed to local
                     features that are out of the scope of the paper (Figure 6c).

                     4.2. Geometry of the Exhumed Mantle
                     High-density, high-velocity bodies have been previously identiﬁed along the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and
                     the Pyrenees and interpreted either as exhumed lower crust material (e.g., Grandjean, 1994; Jammes et al.,
                     2010; Muñoz, 1992; Pedreira et al., 2003, 2007; Quintana et al., 2015; Teixell, 1998; Vacher & Souriau, 2001)
                     or as mantle rock (e.g., Casas et al., 1997; Tugend et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016). The high-density body
                     derived from our gravity inversion continuously extends beneath the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and along
                     the North Pyrenean zone (Figure 7). It is connected to the mantle in agreement with Wang et al. (2016), which
                     constituted a main difference with previous models (e.g., Muñoz, 1992; Teixell, 1998; Pedreira et al., 2003,
                     2007; Quintana et al., 2015) and reaches shallow crustal levels also locally attaining the topographic surface.
                     The body shows an asymmetric cross-sectional shape shallowing to the north beneath the Basque-
                     Cantabrian Basin in the L1, L2, and L3 sections (Figure 7). Within this sector, the high-density crustal body
                     reaches a maximum width of ~50 km extending up to 2.5 km in depth at the shallowest levels. In sections
                     L5 and L6 crossing the western Pyrenees beneath the Mauleòn-Arzacq Basin, the body shows an
                     asymmetric-shape shallowing to the south. Here the high-density body varies from ~30 to ~50 km wide.
                     L4, adjacent to the Pamplona Fault, shows a ~50 km wide symmetric ellipsoidal shape representing a transi-
                     tion between the two opposed asymmetric domains. Further east, in the central Pyrenees, the high-density
                     body becomes narrow (~15 km wide) and extends vertically to levels near to the topographic surface.
                     Prominent magnetic anomalies (Figure 4b) accompany the high-density body along all of its paths. Beneath
                     the Mauléon-Arzacq Basin, the positive Bouguer anomaly also coincides with a fast Vp and Vs velocity anom-
                     aly (Wang et al., 2016). Seismic refraction/wide-angle reﬂection proﬁles also identify a high-velocity anoma-
                     lous body placed within the upper crust in the Basque Cantabrian-Basin (Pedreira et al., 2003, Figure 13,


PEDRERA ET AL.                   MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                     3162
                                Tectonics                                                                                            10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 6. Inversion of the crustal residual gravity anomalies. (a) Crustal residual gravity anomaly plotted against tectonic structures. (b) Top of the modeled crustal
                             3
high-density body (2.9 g/cm ) interpreted as exhumed mantle using 3-D gravity inversion. Note the correlation between the main tectonic structures and the
exhumed mantle geometry. (c) Gravity error derived from the 3-D gravity inversion.


PEDRERA ET AL.                                          MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                                 3163
                 Tectonics                                                                                  10.1002/2017TC004716




                     Figure 7. Geometry of the exhumed mantle in nine parallel sections. L3 coincides with the crustal-scale cross section in
                     Figures 8–11.


                     beneath Shot I). Regarding its geophysical response and taking into account that outcropping ultramaﬁc
                     rocks and coeval thermal metamorphism have been found close to the North Pyrenean and Leitza faults,
                     we are able to interpret the high-density body as ultramaﬁc exhumed rocks of mantle origin (e.g., Casas
                     et al., 1997; Tugend et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016).


PEDRERA ET AL.                    MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                             3164
                 Tectonics                                                                             10.1002/2017TC004716



                     5. Tectonic Structure
                     5.1. Crustal Scale Geological Cross-Section Construction
                     The Basque-Cantabrian Basin is largely covered by commercial seismic reﬂection lines (Figure 2), acquired
                     ever since 1970 by companies such as REPSOL, CIEPSA, CAMPSA, ENPASA, ENIEPSA, ELF Aquitania, and
                     SHESA, among others. Seismic line distribution is heterogeneously more densely covering the Alavesa and
                     the Landes platforms. Although the processing sequence varies from each survey, in most of the cases, it
                     comprises of demultiplexing, gain recovery, summing, deconvolution, and static and dynamic corrections
                     and RNMO correction. Five seismic lines (CE-11, SA81-03, ZU-2; VZ-77-136, and ESP-44), available from the
                     Hydrocarbons Spanish Database (http://info.igme.es/infogeof/), roughly coincide with the studied cross sec-
                     tion and have been reinterpreted. The time window is variable and ranges between 3 and 6 s with a sample
                     interval of 2 ms. In addition, seven deep boreholes (San Antonio-1, Marinda-1, Arratia-1, Gernika-1, Aulesti-1,
                     Vizcaya C-2, and Vizcaya C-3) have been used to interpret the seismic stratigraphy and to constrain the sec-
                     tion. Velocity data coming from the boreholes San Antonio-1 (Frankovic et al., 2016), Vizcaya C-2, and Vizcaya
                     C-3 have been used to convert reﬂection times into depth (Huedo Cuesta et al., 2009).
                     Previous geological maps at 1:25,000 (Garrote Ruiz, Muñoz Jiménez, Fernández Carrasco, Cerezo Arasti,
                     Tijero Sanz, et al., 1991; Garrote Ruiz, Muñoz Jiménez, Fernández Carrasco, Cerezo Arasti, & Zapata Sola,
                     1991; Garrote Ruiz, et al., 1992a, 1992b; Garrote Ruiz, Muñoz Jiménez, et al., 1993; Garrote Ruiz, García
                     Portero, Arriola Garrido, et al., 1993; Garrote Ruiz, García Portero, Fernández Carrasco, et al., 1993; Garrote
                     Ruiz et al., 1994), 1:50,000 scale (Robador Moreno et al., 2010), and 1:1000000 scale (Rodríguez-Fernández
                     et al., 2014) were used to construct the geological map of Figure 2 as well as the cross section. In this section,
                     the top-mantle surface has been constrained from the 2-D and 3-D gravity models. Restoration has been
                     attained using fault-parallel ﬂow (Egan et al., 1997; Kane et al., 1997) in Move Suite© software, which considers
                     that the rocks within the hanging wall move parallel to the fault surface, following virtual ﬂow paths. The
                     overburden placed above the Triassic ductile rocks has been unfolded using a ﬂexural-slip mechanism that
                     considers plane strain slip within sedimentary layers. As is described below, plastic movement of Keuper
                     mudstones and evaporites favored decoupling between basement and cover-inducing shale tectonics
                     (e.g., Graue, 2000; Wood, 2010). The area of the Keuper material has not been preserved in the restoration
                     since ﬂow oblique to the cross section is expected. Therefore, the geometry of the Triassic material during
                     restoration is mostly reconstructed considering the unfolded geometry of the cover placed above and
                     considering well-known examples of salt (e.g., Jackson & Hudec, 2017), shale (e.g., Wood, 2010), and diapir
                     restoration (Lopez-Mir et al., 2014a) available in the literature. In addition, ductile deformation including pure
                     shear is considered within the lower crust.

                     5.2. Structural Description
                     Seen in planform, the structure of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin consists of an array of WNW-ESE parallel
                     normal faults lately inverted in Eocene and Oligocene times (Figures 1 and 2). These basement faults dip
                     toward the basin axis and contributed to drastically stretch the crust leading to a narrow asymmetric rift
                     system (~120 km wide in the studied section). NE-SW relay zones made of transfer faults and relay ramps
                     connect the main faults and determined their terminations frequently displaying curvilinear geometries
                     (e.g., Pamplona Fault in Figure 1). Thick syn-rift deposits reaching 9 km accumulated at the basin axis
                     between the Tithonian and early Cenomanian. The ﬁve main basin domains are recognized—the Alavesa
                     Platform, the Bilbao anticlinorium, the Biscay synclinorium, the Biscay anticlinorium, and the Landes
                     Platform—and represented in the cross section (Figures 2, 8, 9, and 10). These domains are interpreted in
                     the section to lie above a major south-dipping master lithospheric extensional detachment (Figure 11).
                     5.2.1. Leitza-Gernika Extensional Detachment
                     The top of the mantle body obtained from gravity modeling shows a stair-step geometry shallowing to the
                     north that is interpreted as a major south-dipping ramp-ﬂat-ramp extensional detachment (Figure 7).
                     Geological mapping and gravimetric data indicate that exposures of aligned shallow faults above the mantle
                     body connect to the east with the Leitza fault zone (Figures 2 and 6). They are linked to synthetic basement
                     faults rooted into a major detachment, hereon in named the Leitza-Gernika extensional detachment, which
                     decisively contributed to thin the continental crust and to exhume the lithospheric mantle. Antithetic base-
                     ment involved normal faults deforming the hanging wall of the Leitza-Gernika extensional detachment
                     accomplishing dissimilar rotation during progressive slipping along the master fault.


PEDRERA ET AL.                    MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                       3165
                                Tectonics                                                                                            10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 8. (a) Detail of the southern part of the crustal-scale cross section showing the structure of the Alavesa Platform dominated by shale tectonics and reversed
basement normal faults under diapirs. (b) Interpreted seismic lines CE-11, SA 81-03, and ZU-2 that are tied to the San Antonio-1 well. (c) Depth converted seismic lines
CE-11, SA 81-03, and ZU-2.


PEDRERA ET AL.                                           MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                                 3166
                               Tectonics                                                                                         10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 9. Detail of the central part of the crustal-scale cross section showing the structure of the Bilbao Anticlonorium, the Biscay synclinorium, and the Biscay
anticlinorium. Same legend as in Figure 8.



                                        Low-strength Triassic Keuper mudstones and evaporites favored decoupling between basement and
                                        Mesozoic cover during extension and succeed the activity of the normal faults. Basement-cover decoupling
                                        is heterogeneous in time and space, highly dependent on the Keuper and the overburden thicknesses.
                                        Mobilization and expulsion of the Triassic Keuper material is largely controlled by the interaction between
                                        the displacement along normal faults and the load of the sedimentary layers deposited in Early Cretaceous
                                        times. Some of these sedimentary units thicken toward speciﬁc faults revealing the age of fault activity.
                                        5.2.2. The Alavesa Platform
                                        The Alavesa platform is limited to the south with the Ebro foreland basin and to the north it connects with the
                                        Bilbao anticlinorium (Figures 2 and 8). It contains up to 5 km thick sedimentary cover. The sequences C3 and
                                        C4 overlie Keuper Triassic rocks with variable thickness, remnants of Muschelkalk Triassic carbonates and
                                        highly disrupted Lower Jurassic limestones. This sector is characterized by south-verging thrusts, two broad
                                        synforms where Paleogene and Miocene units are preserved, and three diapirs composed of Triassic mud-
                                        stones and evaporites. Sedimentary strata show a general dip toward the south, while the top of the base-
                                        ment shows an opposite dip to the north. Therefore, the C2 strata terminate downdip against the Triassic
                                        rocks and locally against the basement.
                                        Four north-dipping main faults are recognized (Figures 2 and 8). The reverse fault A dips ~30° to the north
                                        and locates the thrust front over the Tertiary Ebro Basin. Paleogene to Miocene sedimentary formations, in
                                        the foot-wall of the thrust, show vertical to overturned beds. A south-verging antiform, cored by Triassic
                                        Keuper material, developed in the hanging wall (Figure 8a). Fault A is interpreted to be a foot-wall shortcut
                                        of the normal fault C. Faults B–D are extensional structures antithetic to the Leitza-Gernika extensional
                                        detachment. Fault B, placed between A and C, acted as an extensional fault in Albian times, during the
                                        deposition of the lower Valmaseda Fm (C3), as suggested by the thickness increase of this formation toward
                                        the fault. However, part of the available space during the sedimentation of this formation was produced by
                                        the expulsion of Keuper material. Fault B was latterly reversed, involved in the foot-wall shortcut of the fault C,
                                        producing a smooth south-verging antiform (b) in the hanging wall as the geoseismic line CE-11 indicates. A
                                        broad synform, interpreted as a Keuper withdrawal minibasin, localizes between fault B and the Salina de
                                        Araña Diapir. Argillokinetic unconformities indicate that the diapir was active during the deposit of the C3
                                        and C4 units and in Paleogene to middle Miocene times. The location of the diapir coincides with the base-
                                        ment fault C imaged in the seismic lines SA81-03 and ZU-2, with a reverse offset of a few hundred meters.
                                        Fault C is interpreted as a normal fault active during C3 deposition, the latter reactivated as a reverse fault.
                                        Similarly, the location of the Murgía Diapir was controlled by a north-dipping basement fault (Fault D) active
                                        during C2, which, in this case, maintains its original extensional geometry.
                                        5.2.3. The Bilbao Anticlinorium
                                        The most complete C2 syn-rift depositional sequence is preserved in the Bilbao anticlinorium (Figures 2 and 9)
                                        restricted to the hanging wall of Fault D, while it is absent southward of the Murgía diapir. The antiformal


PEDRERA ET AL.                                         MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                             3167
                               Tectonics                                                                                          10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 10. (a) Detail of the northern part of the crustal-scale cross section showing the structure of the Biscay Anticlonorium and the Landes Platform. Same legend
as in Figure 8. (b) Interpreted seismic lines VZ-77-136 and ESP-44 that are tied to the Vizcaya C2 well. (c) Depth converted seismic lines VZ-77-136 and ESP-44.




PEDRERA ET AL.                                         MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                               3168
                               Tectonics                                                                             10.1002/2017TC004716




Figure 11. Crustal-scale sequential restoration and main tectonic events in the basin. Same legend as in Figure 8.


PEDRERA ET AL.                                         MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                        3169
                 Tectonics                                                                             10.1002/2017TC004716



                     structure of the Bilbao anticlinorium is interpreted here as a rollover anticline developed above the
                     Leitza-Gernika extensional detachment. This rollover anticline is a very important feature that reinforces
                     the interpretation of the asymmetric extensional system controlling the basin. It is cut by south-dipping
                     normal faults (Faults E and F) showing a northward dip reduction from 70 to 30°. These faults are synthetic
                     to the Leitza-Gernika extensional detachment rotated during extension and latterly inverted during the con-
                     tractional reactivation of the main extensional detachment. Fault E (the Villaro Fault, Fernández-Mendiola &
                     García-Mondejar, 1983) affects both cover and basement, revealing coupled deformation within the crestal
                     area. The maximum thickness achieved in the Villaro Fm (C2), over 3,300 m, occurred along the hanging wall
                     of Fault E. The Arratia 1 borehole at the foot wall of Fault E penetrates the Villaro Fm showing strong reduc-
                     tion in thickness (~1,800 m). An Aptian-Albian reefal barrier (the Ramales platform; e.g., García-Mondéjar,
                     1990) developed in the crestal zone of the rollover anticline. Minor conjugate normal faults formed due
                     to the collapse of the crestal zone in Aptian-Albian times inducing the expansion of the Ereza and Ason
                     Fms (C2) toward the faults. The sedimentary cover was deformed into a harpoon antiform (c) by reverse
                     reactivation of Fault E. The positive inversion of the collapse graben system produced close to tight upright
                     folds (antiform d and e) and a north-vergent antiform (f) in the northern limb of the rollover anticline.
                     5.2.4. The Biscay Synclinorium
                     Biscay synclinorium encloses the most complete C3 depositional sequence. It includes a Cenomanian to
                     Santonian volcano-sedimentary unit followed by Santonian-Campanian and Campanian-Maastrichtian
                     ﬂysh-type units, all showing asymmetrical wedge shapes (Figure 9). Jurassic, C1, and C2 strata are interrupted
                     downdip against the Leitza-Gernika detachment and are absent in the synclinorium, and as a result, the C3
                     sequence lies directly above the basement and the Triassic rocks. A condensed Paleocene unit is followed
                     by ~2,500 m thick Early Eocene turbidites drawing a synformal geometry. In the cross section, the northern
                     limit of this structure is marked by the Gernika diapir. There, the Deba Fm (C3) capped the expulsed
                     Triassic rocks, thus dating the top age of the diapir formation. Thickness variations are also observed within
                     the C3 syn-rift sequence thickening from ~2,000 m in the southern limb to ~3,500 m in the northern one. The
                     synclinorium exactly matches the shallowest top of the exhumed mantle; both structures are elongated in
                     the WNW-ESE direction.
                     The Biscay synclinorium is interpreted as a hanging wall growth syncline linked to the movement along the
                     Leitza-Gernika extensional detachment. Ductile Triassic rocks acted as a décollement during extension,
                     controlling the architecture of the sedimentary wedges. In that light, the Gernika diapir resulted from the
                     expulsion of shale during and after the extensional detachment activity. Chevron-style folds deforming the
                     Deba Fm and Cuisian turbidites are best explained by buttressing during the contractional reactivation of
                     the extensional detachment.
                     5.2.5. The Biscay Anticlinorium
                     The Jurassic and C1 sequences, absent in the Biscay synclinorium, in this northern structure are placed over
                     Triassic Keuper rocks (Figures 9 and 10). Syn-rift sequences C3 and C4 display a very asymmetric geometry
                     characterized by strong thickness condensation toward the south, the Gernika Diapir, and downlap of the
                     C3 and C4 units against the Keuper rock toward the north. This domain is affected by a general rotation, being
                     that the sedimentary sequence is tilted 30 to 70° to the north. Conjugated normal faults deforming the cover
                     were also affected by the rotation and reversal. We suggest that the normal fault affecting the cover devel-
                     oped during the activity of the basement faults G and H. The Aulesti-1 borehole crosses three repetitions
                     of the Jurassic and C1 units linked with a top-to-the north reverse reactivation of these faults. The northern
                     boundary is a squeezed diapir also affected by top-to-the north reverse faults. The Vizcaya C-2 borehole
                     displays duplication of the Cretaceous-Eocene sequence with presence of pierced Triassic material and
                     sharply overturned synforms typical of overriding salt glaciers.
                     5.2.6. The Landes Platform
                     Lower Cretaceous sedimentary units (C1, C2, and C3) are very thin or absent in the Landes Platform, which is
                     mostly ﬁlled by syn-orogenic Eocene and Oligocene sediments (Figure 10). This represents the continuation
                     of the Aquitanian foreland basin toward the west (Daignières et al., 1994; Ferrer et al., 2008). Late to postoro-
                     genic Miocene to Quaternary sediments are unconformably placed above in the northern part of the cross
                     section. Eocene and Oligocene strata display onlap relationships with the Cretaceous and Paleocene units.
                     It can be seen on seismic line SPB-40 tied with the Vizcaya C-3 borehole, which penetrated ~2,900 m of
                     Eocene and Oligocene detritic material and a thin upper Cretaceous C4 and Paleocene sequence (Gaviota
                     Fm, Zumaya Fm, and Paleocene unit) unconformably placed above the Carboniferous basement. Three


PEDRERA ET AL.                    MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                      3170
                 Tectonics                                                                             10.1002/2017TC004716



                     main top-to-the north thrusts I, J, and K are recognized in the seismic lines (e.g., line VZ-77-136 in Figure 10)
                     and are interpreted as cross-cutting the basement.


                     6. Discussion
                     6.1. Rifting Processes and Mantle Exhumation Along the North Iberian Margin
                     The Basque-Cantabrian Basin is a narrow asymmetric rift system interpreted here as an oblique rift
                     because NW-SE interior faults are oblique to the roughly E-W edges of the rift represented by the
                     Landes and Ebro platforms. Half-graben bounding faults are rooted into the south-dipping Gernika-
                     Leitza extensional detachment with a ramp-ﬂat-ramp lithospheric-scale geometry. The activity of the
                     Gernika-Leitza detachment determines the dissimilar margins of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and the
                     observed asymmetry in the exhumed mantle, which reaches the shallowest crustal levels along the
                     Biscay synclinorium, close to the north basin boundary (Figures 7 and 11). The crustal-scale geometry of
                     the rift described above notably differs from recent models (Roca et al., 2011; Tugend et al., 2014). Here
                     we propose that the basin developed in the hanging wall of a major north-dipping detachment.
                     The geometry of the Gernica-Leitza extensional system, from proximal to distal part, encloses four subdivi-
                     sions (Figure 11). (i) A splay of synthetic normal faults is recognized along the northern basin margin that
                     was rooted into the detachment and tilted during its progressive top-to-the south motion and subsequent
                     doming within the exhumation area. These rotated upper crustal fault blocks are in sheared contact with
                     the exhumed mantle forming a breakaway imbricate in the sense of Wernicke and Axen (1988). (ii) A rollover
                     anticline is linked to the ramp-ﬂat-ramp detachment and deformed by synthetic rotating normal faults.
                     (iii) The crustal breakup and peridotite unrooﬁng sector is located between the rotated block domains and
                     the rollover anticline. This area has undergone profuse alkaline volcanic activity in Albian to Santonian times.
                     (iv) Antithetic normal faults deform the distal sector. Simple-shear extension acting in brittle conditions
                     determines the structural style within the upper crust. At lower crustal levels, the crust was completely
                     attenuated in ductile conditions with a presumably pure shear component induced by upward displacement
                     of the asthenosphere (Figure 11).
                     The extensional structures recognized in the Basque-Cantabrian Basin continue along the Pyrenees consti-
                     tuting the so-called Pyrenean-Basque-Cantabrian rift system (Quintana et al., 2015; Tugend et al., 2014).
                     Therefore, slip accommodated along the Gernica-Leitza extensional detachment was transferred through
                     the Pamplona left-lateral fault to the North Pyrenean Fault. The gravity model indicates that the exhumed
                     mantle was roughly continuous along the whole rift system. The exhumed mantle shows a left-lateral off-
                     set along the Pamplona transfer fault. While the mantle rocks were reworked at the surface in the North
                     Pyrenean zone (e.g., Clerc et al., 2013; Jammes et al., 2009; Lagabrielle et al., 2010; Lagabrielle &
                     Bodinier, 2008) and close to the Pamplona Fault (DeFelipe et al., 2017), they remained near the surface
                     but were not reworked or incorporated into the sedimentary sequence in the Basque-Cantabrian Basin.
                     According to Jammes et al. (2009) extension along the North Pyrenean zone was linked to a north-dipping
                     extensional detachment system as suggested by the asymmetric mantle image in L5 and L6 (Figure 7). The
                     architecture of the rift is unclear in the central Pyrenees where south-dipping (Roure et al., 1989) and
                     north-dipping (Muñoz, 2002) lithospheric-scale detachment have been proposed.
                     In respect to the timing of the hyperextension, it has been previously constrained to between Aptian-Albian
                     and early Cenomanian times (Jammes et al., 2009; Roca et al., 2011; Tugend et al., 2014). However, extensional
                     deformation along the axis of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin is documented as having started before, in
                     Valanginian times, with the deposition of ﬂuvial to deltaic sediments thickening against normal fault E
                     (García-Mondéjar et al., 1996; Pujalte et al., 1993) accommodating the initial stage of rollover development
                     (Figure 11). As previously stated, the Cenomanian Deba Fm seals the activity of the Bilbao rollover anticline.
                     Thus, extension spanned ~43 Ma up to early Cenomanian times (C2 and C3), accommodating ~48 km horizon-
                     tal extension at a variable strain rate estimated at 1 mm/yr between Valanginian and middle Albian and
                     increasing up to 4 mm/yr during hyperextension, between middle Albian and early Cenomanian.
                     Nonmagmatic rifting occurs at very low-strain rates in well-developed oceanic basins, with typical values of
                     10 mm/yr or less (Müller et al., 2008). Moreover, the values for the Basque Cantabrian rifting are even lower.
                     Extensional rate increase (>10 mm/yr) in oceanic basins after lithosphere breakup allows maﬁc melt to be pro-
                     duced and oceanic crust to be generated (Pérez-Gussinyé et al., 2006; Pérez-Gussinyé, 2013).


PEDRERA ET AL.                    MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                      3171
                 Tectonics                                                                              10.1002/2017TC004716



                     Postrift cooling and subsidence, linked to thermal contraction, took place during C4 (late Cenomanian to
                     Maastrichtian times) was marked by marine transgression along the whole basin. Volcanic activity occurred
                     over the exhumed mantle domain, followed by ﬂysch deposition. Postrift subsidence and upper
                     Cretaceous high sea levels induced marine transgression and the development of a widespread carbonate
                     platform (the Gaviota Fm) covering the Landes block.

                     6.2. Salt and Shale Tectonics
                     Salt and shale tectonics strongly control the structural style of the sedimentary sequence deposited above
                     the Triassic Keuper unit, mostly composed of mudstones and evaporites with low mechanical strength
                     (Figures 8–11). The grade of extensional coupling between basement and overburden differs along the basin.
                     Coupled deformation is only detected along the Bilbao anticlinorium where the rollover and the synthetic
                     basement-involved faults solidary deformed basement and cover. Structural coupling between basement
                     and cover notably decreases toward the basin boundaries. As normal faults deform the basement, Keuper
                     material ﬂows ﬁlling in the negative relief created in the hanging wall promoting partial decoupling of the
                     overburden. The cover drapes the half-graben, and reactive diapirs were formed across the main faults. In
                     the Alavesa platform this process resulted in expulsion rollovers and the generation of syncline minibasins
                     (e.g., Serrano & Martínez del Olmo, 2004). In the northern basin boundary, the Biscay synclinorium geometry
                     is also controlled by the Keuper rocks, which resulted in decoupling between the C2 and C3 sequences and
                     the basal fault surface. While the subshale section is affected by brittle faulting, the syn-rift sequence is domi-
                     nated by ductile deformation developing a hanging wall growth syncline linked to the top, to the south
                     extension along the Leitza-Gernika detachment and the formation of the nearby rollover anticline. It is limited
                     to the north by a “salt roller,” the Gernika diapir. The Biscay anticline is interpreted as an asymmetric miniba-
                     sin deformed by conjugate normal faults that were rotated during extension and afterward inverted.
                     Previous conceptual models tried to link the extensional processes favoring mantle exhumation followed by
                     gravity gliding of the Mesozoic cover above a sole of Keuper rocks toward an Albian basin (e.g., Lagabrielle
                     et al., 2010). This is clearly a two-step model that ﬁrst creates a submarine slope inducing instability within
                     the basin margins subsequently resolved by gliding and slumping. Not only does our restored cross section
                     illustrate that shale tectonics acting within the cover ﬁrst occur during the activity of deep-rooted extensional
                     faults stretching the crust, but mostly during the thermal contraction phase.

                     6.3. Mountain Building
                     The inversion of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin led to a double vergent orogen bounding by two foreland
                     basins developed due to the load exerted over the lower plates and by the horizontal contraction
                     (Figure 12). The thrusts verge toward the NNE in the Landes platform toward the SSW in the boundary with
                     the Ebro Basin. Crustal rocks underthrusted the lithospheric mantle in the hyperextended region. Rheological
                     factors controlling the inversion mode are as follows: (i) reverse reactivation of previous normal faults
                     within the upper crust is due to the roughly orthogonal trend of the extensional faults with regard to the
                     shortening of direction. (ii) Strong near-surface heterogeneity produced by the exhumed mantle lithosphere
                     acts as a rigid buttress. Under contraction, weaker continental material is expulsed outward and upward by
                     thrusting forming two crustal triangle zones at the boundaries of the exhumed mantle. Strain localizes into
                     the two lithospheric-scale thrusts, which, in turn, reactivated the former rift-bounding normal faults
                     coinciding with the limits of the strong exhumed mantle body. (iii) A zone of weakness, presumably related
                     to the presence of shallow asthenosphere, allows the crustal material to underthrust beneath the stronger
                     mantle lithosphere.
                     Within the upper crust, three main inversion styles can be observed: (a) high-angle basement normal faults
                     reactivated as reverse faults were occasionally accompanied by folding of the sediments against the normal
                     fault; (b) formation of shortcuts involves basement pieces; (c) and decoupled thrust-ramps developed above
                     the preceding basement normal faults.
                     An additional important control in mountain building is shortening rate. Total shortening in the Basque-
                     Cantabrian cross section is estimated at ~34 km. Synorogenic sediments span from the earliest Eocene to
                     the latest Oligocene; that is, the collision time span was about 33 Ma. The downlap geometry of the
                     Eocene and Oligocene synorogenic cover reveals that the Landes Platform was tilted toward the south at that
                     time. Sedimentary depocenter progressively migrated from the south to the north at the time of mountain


PEDRERA ET AL.                    MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                        3172
                 Tectonics                                                                           10.1002/2017TC004716




                     Figure 12. Proposed lithospheric-scale inversion mode.


                     building. In addition, the deformation progressed outward in the Landes Platform as has been deduced from
                     the unconformities placed at the front of the thrusts. What is more, the inner thrust sheets H and I were
                     developed in Eocene times squeezing the diapirs, and the frontal thrust sheet J was active in Oligocene
                     times. The Late Cretaceous thrust activity described in Pyrenees (e.g., Papon, 1969; Garrido-Megías, 1973;
                     García-Senz, 2002; McClay et al., 2004; Lopez-Mir et al., 2014b) has neither been recorded nor identiﬁed to
                     date in the Cantabrian Mountains. As a result, the obtained shortening rate is estimated at ~1.1 mm/year
                     (Figure 11), notably lower than the ~2.5 mm/year obtained in western Pyrenees during 60 Ma (Teixell,
                     1998) or the ~4.5 to ~2 mm/year respectively acting during early to middle Eocene and late Eocene along
                     the South Pyrenean Thrust System in the Eastern Pyrenees (Beaumont et al., 2000; Vergés et al., 1995).
                     Such lower shortening rates across the eastern part of the Cantabrian Mountains were possibly caused by
                     the coeval inversion of the Cameros Basin, caused by the thrust front of the Iberian Chain. Therefore, a far-
                     ﬁeld contraction is accommodated in a much broader sector (eastern Cantabrian Mountains and Cameros)
                     than in the Pyrenees. The boundary between these two strain rate domains is the aforementioned
                     Pamplona transfer fault that also represents a compartmental fault zone during the orogenesis.

                     7. Conclusions
                     During Early Cretaceous rifting, the mantle reached shallow crustal levels along the North Iberian Margin. The
                     analysis and 3-D lithospheric-scale inversion of gravity data allow us to identify the geometry and explain the
                     nature of such high-density bodies. Exhumed mantle extends beneath the Basque-Cantabrian Basin and
                     along the northern side of the Pyrenees. The geometry of the mantle body varies along strike displaying (i)
                     ~30 to ~50 km wide asymmetric shape shallowing to the north in the Basque-Cantabrian Basin, (ii) symmetric
                     ~45 km wide elliptic shape near to the Pamplona Fault, (iii) ~30 to ~50 km wide asymmetric shape shallowing
                     to the south beneath the Mauleòn-Arzacq Basin, and (iv) a narrow (~15 km wide) triangle-shape, elongated
                     vertically in the central Pyrenees.
                     Rifting in the Basque-Cantabrian Basin was controlled by a major south-dipping ramp-ﬂat-ramp extensional
                     detachment active between Valanginian and early Cenomanian times. Along the detachment, circa 48 km
                     horizontal extension has been accommodated at variable strain rates that increased from 1 to ~4 mm/yr in
                     middle Albian times. Triassic Keuper mudstones and evaporites favored the decoupling of the cover during
                     the rift phase, but mostly during the postrift, promoting the formation of minibasins, expulsion rollovers, and


PEDRERA ET AL.                    MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                    3173
                                    Tectonics                                                                                                         10.1002/2017TC004716



                                           diapirs. The inversion of the rift system was accommodated by doubly verging basement thrusts nucleated at
                                           the boundaries with the strong exhumed mantle with partial subduction of the continental lithosphere in
                                           Eocene-Oligocene times.

Acknowledgments                            References
This work beneﬁted from the funding of
the project “Tectonic map of the Iberian   Arenillas-González, A., Mediato-Arribas, J. F., García Crespo, J., Molinero Molinero, R., & Nita, R. C. (2014). In I. Suárez-Díaz (Ed.), Atlas de
Peninsula and the surrounding                 estructuras del subsuelo susceptibles de almacenamiento geológico de CO2 en España (p. 211). Madrid: Instituto Geológico y Minero de
cordilleras” included into the Spanish        España.
National Cartographic Plan, as well as     Ayala, C., Bohoyo, F., Maestro, A., Reguera, M. I., Torne, M., Rubio, F., … García-Lobón, J. L. (2016). Updated Bouguer anomalies of the
the projects CGL2015-71692-P and              Iberian Peninsula: A new perspective to interpret the regional geology. Journal of Maps, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1080/17445647.2015.
CGL2016-80687-R of the Agencia Estatal        1126538
de Investigación (AEI). The geological     Bayrakci, G., Minshull, T. A., Sawyer, D. S., Reston, T. J., Klaeschen, D., Papenberg, C., … Morgan, J. K. (2016). Fault-controlled hydration of the
data referenced in this paper are             upper mantle during continental rifting. Nature Geoscience, 9(5), 384–388. https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2671
available in the text, and the             Beaumont, C., Muñoz, J. A., Hamilton, J., & Fullsack, P. (2000). Factors controlling the Alpine evolution of the central Pyrenees inferred from a
geophysical data are available on the         comparison of observations and geodynamical models. Journal of Geophysical Research, 105(B4), 8121–8145. https://doi.org/10.1029/
IGME website at http://info.igme.es/cat-      1999JB900390
alogo/. We acknowledge the                 Blakely, R. J., Langenheim, V. E., & Ponce, D. A. (2000). Summary of Geophysical Investigations of the Death Valley Regional Water-Flow
constructive comments and                     Modelling Project. Nevada and California: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 00–189.
suggestions of Prof. Frédéric              Boillot, G. (1986). Comparison between the Galicia and Aquitaine margins. Tectonophysics, 129, (1–4), 243–255.
Mouthereau and one anonymous               Boillot, G., Féraud, G., Recq, M., & Girardeau, J. (1989). Undercrusting by serpentinite beneath rifted margins. Nature, 341(6242), 523–525.
reviewer. We thank Editor Claudio             https://doi.org/10.1038/341523a0
Faccenna for handling the manuscript.      Boillot, G., Grimaud, S., Mauffret, A., Mougenot, D., Mergoil-Daniel, J., Kornprobst, J., & Torrent, G. (1980). Ocean-continent boundary off the
                                              Iberian margin: A serpentinite diapir west of the Galicia Bank. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 48(1), 23–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/
                                              0012-821X(80)90166-1
                                           Brun, J.-P., & Beslier, M. O. (1996). Mantle exhumation atpassive margins. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 142, 161–173.
                                           Brune, S., Heine, C., Perez-Gussinye, M., & Sobolev, S. V. (2014). Rift migration explains continental margin asymmetry and crustal hyper-
                                              extension. Nature Communications, 5. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms5014
                                           Brune, S., Corti, G., & Ranalli, G. (2017). Controls of inherited lithospheric heterogeneity on rift linkage: Numerical and analogue models of
                                              interaction between the Kenyan and Ethiopian rifts across the Turkana depression. Tectonics, 36, 1767–1786. https://doi.org/10.1002/
                                              2017TC004739
                                           Casas, A., Kearey, P., Rivero, L., & Adam, C. R. (1997). Gravity anomaly map of the Pyrenean region and a comparison of the deep geological
                                              structure of the western and eastern Pyrenees. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 150(1-2), 65–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-821X%
                                              20(97)00087-3
                                           Castañares, L. M., & Robles, S. (2004). El vulcanismo del Albiense-Santoniense en la Cuenca Vasco-Cantábrica. In J. A. Vera (Ed.), Geología de
                                              España (pp. 306–308). Madrid: SGE-IGME.
                                           Castañares, L. M., Robles, S., Gimeno, D., & Vicente Bravo, J. C. (2001). The submarine volcanic system of the Errigoiti Formation
                                              (Albian-Santonian of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin, northern Spain): Stratigraphic framework, facies, and sequences. Journal of
                                              Sedimentary Research, 71(2), 318–333. https://doi.org/10.1306/080700710318
                                           Choukroune, P., Seguret, M., & Galdeano, A. (1973). Caractéristiques et évolution structurale des Pyrénées: un modèle de relations entre zone
                                              orogénique et mouvement des plaques. Bulletin de la Société Géologique de France, 15, 600–611.
                                           Clerc, C., Boulvais, P., Lagabrielle, Y., & de Saint Blanquat, M. (2013). Ophicalcites from the northern Pyrenean belt: A ﬁeld, petrographic and
                                              stable isotope study. International Journal of Earth Sciences, 103(1), 141–163. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00531-013-0927-z
                                           Clerc, C., & Lagabrielle, Y. (2014). Thermal control on the modes of crustal thinning leading to mantle exhumation: Insights from the
                                              Cretaceous Pyrenean hot paleomargins. Tectonics, 33, 1340–1359. https://doi.org/10.1002/2013TC003471
                                           Daignières, M., Séguret, M., Specht, M., & ECORS team (1994). The Arzacq-western Pyrenees ECORS deep seismic proﬁle. In A. Mascle (Ed.),
                                              Hydrocarbon and Petroleum Geology of France, Publ. Eur. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Mem (Vol. 4, pp. 199–208). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. https://
                                              doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-78849-9_15
                                           Debroas, E. (1987). Modèle de bassin triangulaire à l’intersection de décrochements divergents pour le fossé albo-cénomanien de la
                                              Ballongue (zone nord-pyrénéenne, France). Bulletin de la Societe Geologique de France, 3, 887–898.
                                           Debroas, E. (1990). Le Flysch noir albo-cénomanien témoin de la structuration albienne à sénonienne de la Zone nord-pyrénéenne en
                                              Bigorre (Hautes-Pyrénées, France). Bulletin de la Societe Geologique de France, 6, 273–285.
                                           DeFelipe, I., Pedreira, D., Pulgar, J. A., Iriarte, E., & Mendia, M. (2017). Mantle exhumation and metamorphism in the Basque-Cantabrian Basin
                                              (N Spain): Stable and clumped isotope analysis in carbonates and comparison with ophicalcites in the North-Pyrenean Zone (Urdach and
                                              Lherz). Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 18(2), 631–652. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GC006690
                                           Egan, S. S., Buddin, T. S., Kane, S. J., & Williams, G. D. (1997). Three-dimensional modelling and visualisation in structural geology: New
                                              techniques for the restoration and balancing of volumes. In Proceedings of the 1996 Geoscience Information Group Conference on
                                              Geological Visualisation. Electronic Geology (Vol. 1, pp. 67–82).
                                           Espina, R. (1997). La estructura y evolución tectonoestratigráﬁca del borde occidental de la Cuenca Vasco-Cantábrica (Cordillera Cantábrica,
                                              NO de España), PhD Thesis, Univerity of Oviedo. 230 pp.
                                           Espina, R., Alonso, J. L., & Pulgar, J. A. (2004). Extensión Triásica en la Cuenca Vasco-Cantábrica. In J. A. Vera (Ed.), Geología de España
                                              (pp. 338–339). Madrid: SGEIGME.
                                           Fabriès, J., Lorand, J. P., & Bodinier, J. L. (1998). Petrogenetic evolution of orogenic lherzolite massifs in the central and western Pyrenees.
                                              Tectonophysics, 292(1-2), 145–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-1951(98)00055-9
                                           Fernández-Mendiola, P. A., & García-Mondejar, J. (1983). Estudio geológico del Anticlinorio de Bilbao en el sector del Duranguesado. Kobie, 8,
                                              299–320.
                                           Fernández-Mendiola, P. A., & García-Mondéjar, J. (1995). Volcaniclastic sediments in the early Albian Mañaria carbonate platform (northern
                                              Spain). Cretaceous Research, 16(4), 451–463. https://doi.org/10.1006/cres.1995.1031
                                           Ferrer, O., Roca, E., Benjumea, B., Muñoz, J. A., Ellouz, N., & the MARCONI Team (2008). The deep seismic reﬂection MARCONI-3 proﬁle: Role of
                                              extensional Mesozoic structure during the Pyrenean contractional deformation at the eastern part of the Bay of Biscay. Marine and
                                              Petroleum Geology, 25(8), 714–730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpetgeo.2008.06.002



PEDRERA ET AL.                                              MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                                                    3174
                 Tectonics                                                                                                        10.1002/2017TC004716



                     Fitzgerald, P. G., Muñoz, J. A., Coney, P. J., & Baldwin, S. L. (1999). Asymmetric exhumation across the Pyrenean orogen: Implications for the
                        tectonic evolution of a collisional orogeny. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 173(3), 157–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-
                        821X(99)00225-3
                     Frankovic, A., Eguiluz, L., & Martínez-Torres, L. M. (2016). Geodynamic evolution of the Salinas de Anana diapir in the Basque-Cantabrian
                        Basin, Western Pyrenees. Journal of Structural Geology, 83, 13–27.
                     Gallastegui, J. (2000). Estructura cortical de la cordillera y margen continental cantábricos: perﬁles ESCI-N, PhD Thesis, Trabajos de Geología,
                        Universidad de Oviedo, España, 22, 220 p.
                     Gallastegui, J., Pulgar, J. A., & Gallart, J. (2002). Initiation of an active margin at the North Iberian continent-ocean transition, Tectonics, 21(4),
                        1033. https://doi.org/10.1029/2001TC901046
                     García-Mondéjar, J. (1990). The Aptiane Albian carbonate episode of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin (northern Spain): General characteristics,
                        controls and evolution. In M. E. Tucker, et al. (Eds.), Carbonate Platforms: Facies, Sequences and Evolution, Special Publication International
                        Association of Sedimentologists (Vol. 9, pp. 257–290).
                     García-Mondéjar, J., Agirrezabala, L. M., Aranburu, A., Fernández-Mendiola, P. A., Gómez-Pérez, I., López-Horgue, M. A., & Rosales, I. (1996). The
                        Aptian-Albian tectonic pattern of the Basque-Cantabrian Basin (northern Spain). Geological Journal, 31(1), 13–45. https://doi.org/10.1002/
                        (SICI)1099-1034(199603)31:1<13::AID-GJ689>3.0.CO;2-Y
                     García-Mondéjar, J., Fernández-Mendiola, P. A., Agurrezabala, L. M., Aranburu, A., López-Horgue, M. A., Iriarte, E., & Martínez de Rituerto, S.
                        (2004). Aptiense-Albiense de la Cuenca Vasco-Cantábrica. In J. A. Vera (Ed.), Geología de España (pp. 291–296). Madrid: Sociedad Geológica
                        de España-Instituto Geológico y Minero.
                     García-Mondéjar, J., Pujalte, V., & Robles, S. (1986). Caracteristicas sedimentológicas secuenciales y tectonoestratigraﬁcas del triasico de la
                        Cantabria y norte de Palencia. Cuad Geology Ibérica, 10, 151–172.
                     García-Senz, J. (2002). Cuencas extensivas del Cretácico inferior en los Pirineos centrales, formación y subsecuente inversión (PhD
                        dissertation). University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 310 p.
                     Garrido-Megías, A. (1973). Estudio geológico y relación entre tectónica y sedimentación del Secundario y Terciario de la vertiente meridional
                        pirenaica en su zona central (provincias de Huesca y Lérida) (PhD dissertation). University of Granada, 395 p.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., García Portero, J., Arriola Garrido, A., Eguigurren Altuna, E., García Pascual, I., & Garrote Ruiz, R. (1992a). Geological map of
                        Basque Country at 1:25000000 scale. Sheet 38-IV, Elantxobe. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., García Portero, J., Arriola Garrido, A., Eguigurren Altuna, E., García Pascual, I., & Garrote Ruiz, R. (1992b). Geological map of
                        Basque Country at 1:25000000 scale. Sheet 62-III, Galdakao. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., García Portero, J., Arriola Garrido, A., Eguigurren Altuna, E., García Pascual, I., & Garrote Ruiz, R. (1993). Geological map of
                        Basque Country at 1:25000000 scale. Sheet 87-I, Igorre. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., García Portero, J., Fernández Carrasco, J., Cerezo Arasti, A., Tijero Sanz, F., & Zapata Sola, M. (1993). Geological map of Basque
                        Country at 1:25000000 scale. Sheet 62-IV, Durango. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., Muñoz Jiménez, L., Arriola Garrido, A., Eguigurren Altuna, E., & García Pascual, I. (1993). Geological map of Basque Country at
                        1:25000000 scale. Sheet 111-I-II, Orduña. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., Muñoz Jiménez, L., Arriola Garrido, A., Eguigurren Altuna, E., & García Pascual, I. (1994). Geological map of Basque Country at
                        1:25000000 scale. Sheet 112-I, Zuya Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., Muñoz Jiménez, L., Fernández Carrasco, J., Cerezo Arasti, A., Tijero Sanz, F., Zapata Sola, M., & Martínez Vallvey, M. (1991).
                        Geological map of Basque Country at 1:25000000 scale. Sheet 111-IV, Cuartango. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., Muñoz Jiménez, L., Fernández Carrasco, J., Cerezo Arasti, A., & Zapata Sola, M. (1991). Geological map of Basque Country at
                        1:25000000 scale. Sheet 137-II, Ribera Alta. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Garrote Ruiz, A., Muñoz Jiménez, L., Fernández Carrasco, J., Cerezo Arasti, A., & Zapata Sola, M. (1992). Geological map of Basque Country at
                        1:25000000 scale. Sheet 137-IV, 169-II, Miranda de Ebro. Edited by the Ente Vasco de la Energía.
                     Grandjean, G. (1994). Etude des structures crustales dans une portion de chaîne et de leur relation avec les bassins sédimentaires.
                        Application aux Pyrénées occidentales. Bulletin des Centres de Recherches Exploration-Production Elf-Aquitaine, 18, 391–420.
                     Graue, K. (2000). Mud volcanoes in deepwater Nigeria. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 17, 959–974. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0264-
                        8172(00)00016-7
                     Huedo Cuesta, J. L., Cole, C., Pérez García, A., Zucconi, V., Clauss, O., Sese Martínez, & V. H., Muskaj, S. (2009). Construcción del modelo de
                        velocidades para el reprocesado en profundidad de la sísmica Fragata 3D (plataforma y talud continentales de Vizcaya). In G. Flor
                        Rodríguez, et al. (Eds.), Nuevas contribuciones al Margen Ibérico Atlántico. 6° Simposio sobre el Margen Ibérico Atlántico, MIA09,
                        Departamento de Geología, Universidad de Oviedo. Volumen de Actas, 93-96. Oviedo.
                     Huismans, R., & Beaumont, C. (2005). Effect of plastic-viscous layering and strain softening on mode selection during lithospheric extension.
                        Journal of Geophysical Research, 110, B02406. https://doi.org/10.1029/2004JB003114
                     Jackson, M., & Hudec, M. (2017). Salt Tectonics: Principles and Practice. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139003988
                     Jammes, S., Lavier, L., & Manatschal, G. (2010). Extreme crustal thinning in the Bay of Biscay and the Western Pyrenees: From observations to
                        modeling. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 11, Q10016. https://doi.org/10.1029/2010GC003218
                     Jammes, S., Manatschal, G., Lavier, L., & Masini, E. (2009). Tectonosedimentary evolution related to extreme crustal thinning ahead of a
                        propagating ocean: Example of the western Pyrenees. Tectonics, 28, TC4012. https://doi.org/10.1029/2008TC002406
                     Kane, S. J., Williams, G. D., Buddin, T. S., Egan, S. S., & Hodgetts, D. (1997). Flexural-slip based restoration in 3D, a new approach. AAPG Annual
                        Convention Ofﬁcial Program, A58.
                     Lagabrielle, Y., & Bodinier, J. L. (2008). Submarine reworking of exhumed subcontinental mantle rocks: Field evidence from the Lherz
                        peridotites, French Pyrenees. Terra Nova, 20, 11–21. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3121.2007.00781.x
                     Lagabrielle, Y., Labaume, P., & de Saint Blanquat, M. (2010). Mantle exhumation, crustal denudation, and gravity tectonics during Cretaceous
                        rifting in the Pyrenean realm (SW Europe): Insights from the geological setting of the lherzolite bodies. Tectonics, 29, TC4012. https://doi.
                        org/10.1029/2009TC002588
                     Lavier, L. L., & Manatschal, G. (2006). A mechanism to thin the continental lithosphere at magma-poor margins. Nature, 440, 324–328. https://
                        doi.org/10.1038/nature04608
                     Le Pichon, X., & Sibuet, J. (1981). Passive margins: A model of formation. Journal of Geophysical Research, 86, 3708–3720. https://doi.org/
                        10.1029/JB086iB05p03708
                     Lopez-Mir, B., Muñoz, J. A., & García-Senz, J. (2014a). Restoration of basins driven by extension and salt tectonics: Example from the Cotiella
                        Basin in the central Pyrenees. Journal of Structural Geology, 69, 147–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsg.2014.09.022
                     Lopez-Mir, B., Muñoz, J. A., & García-Senz, J. (2014b). Extensional salt tectonics in the partially inverted Cotiella post-rift basin (south-central
                        Pyrenees): Structure and evolution. International Journal of Earth Sciences, 104(2), 419–434.



PEDRERA ET AL.                        MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                                                       3175
                 Tectonics                                                                                                       10.1002/2017TC004716



                     Manatschal, G. (2004). New models for evolution of magma-poor rifted margins based on a review of data and concepts from West Iberia
                        and the Alps. International Journal of Earth Sciences, 93, 432–466. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00531-004-0394-7
                     Manatschal, G., Froitzheim, N., Rubenach, M. J., & Turrin, B. (2001). The role of detachment faulting in the formation of an ocean-continent
                        transition: Insights from the Iberia Abyssal Plain. In R. C. L. Wilson, et al. (Eds.), Non-Volcanic Rifting of Continental Margins: Evidence From
                        Land and Sea, Geological Society Special Publication (Vol. 187, pp. 405–428).
                     Mancilla, F. L., & Diaz, J. (2015). High resolution Moho topography map beneath Iberia and Northern Morocco from receiver function analysis.
                        Tectonophysics, 663, 203–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2015.06.017
                     McClay, K., Muñoz, J. A., & Garcia-Senz, J. (2004). Extensional salt tectonics in a contractional orogen: A newly identiﬁed tectonic event in the
                        Spanish Pyrenees. Geology, 32, 737–740. https://doi.org/10.1130/G20565.1
                     Mouthereau, F., Filleaudeau, P.-Y., Vacherat, A., Pik, R., Lacombe, O., Fellin, M. G., … Masini, E. (2014). Placing limits to shortening evolution in
                        the Pyrenees: Role of margin architecture and implications for the Iberia/Europe convergence. Tectonics, 33, 2283–2314. https://doi.org/
                        10.1002/2014TC003663
                     Müller, R. D., Sdrolias, M., Gaina, C., & Roest, W. R. (2008). Age, spreading rates, and spreading asymmetry of the world’s ocean crust.
                        Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 9, Q04006. https://doi.org/10.1029/2007GC001743
                     Muñoz, J. A. (1992). Evolution of continental collision belt: ECORS Pyrenees crustal balanced cross-section. In K. R. McClay (Ed.), Thrust
                        Tectonics (pp. 235–246). London, UK: Chapman and Hall. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-3066-0_21
                     Muñoz, J. A. (2002). Alpine tectonics I: The Alpine system north of the Betic Cordillera: The Pyrenees. In W. Gibbons & T. Moreno (Eds.), The
                        Geology of Spain (pp. 370–385). London: Geological Society of London.
                     Papon, J. P. (1969). Etude géologique du massif montagneux du Turbon (Pyrénées aragonaises- Espagne). Bulletin de la Société d’histoire
                        naturelle de Toulouse, 105, 191–211.
                     Parker, R. L. (1972). The rapid calculation of potential anomalies: Geophysical Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 42, 315–334.
                     Pedreira, D., Afonso, J. C., Pulgar, J. A., Gallastegui, J., Carballo, A., Fernàndez, M., … García-Moreno, O. (2015). Geophysical-petrological
                        modeling of the lithosphere beneath the Cantabrian Mountains and North-Iberian Margin: Geodynamic implications. Lithos, 230, 46–68.
                        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lithos.2015.04.018
                     Pedreira, D., Pulgar, J. A., Gallart, J., & Díaz, J. (2003). Seismic evidence of Alpine crustal thickening and wedging from the western Pyrenees to
                        the Cantabrian Mountains (north Iberia). Journal of Geophysical Research, 108(B4), 2204. https://doi.org/10.1029/2001JB001667
                     Pedreira, D., Pulgar, J. A., Gallart, J., & Torné, M. (2007). Three-dimensional gravity and magnetic modeling of crustal indentation and
                        wedging in the western Pyrenees-Cantabrian Mountains. Journal of Geophysical Research, 112, B12405. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                        2007JB005021
                     Pérez-Gussinyé, M. (2013). A tectonic model for hyperextension at magma-poor rifted margins: An example from the West Iberia-
                        Newfoundland conjugate margins. Geological Society of London, Special Publication, 369(1), 403–427. https://doi.org/10.1144/SP369.19
                     Pérez-Gussinyé, M., Morgan, J. P., Reston, T. J., & Ranero, C. R. (2006). The rift to drift transition at non-volcanic margins: Insights from
                        numerical modelling. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 244, 458–473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2006.01.059
                     Pérez-Gussinyé, M., & Reston, T. J. (2001). Rheological evolution during extension at nonvolcanic rifted margins: Onset of serpentinization
                        and development of detachments leading to continental breakup. Journal of Geophysical Research, 106(B3), 3961–3975. https://doi.org/
                        10.1029/2000JB900325
                     Peybernk, B., & Soquet, P. (1984). Basement blocks and tecto-sedimentary evolution in the Pyrenees during Mesozoic times. Geological
                        Magazine, 121(05), 397–405. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0016756800029927
                     Pujalte, V. (1977). El Complejo Purbeck-Weald de Santander: Estratigrafía y Sedimentación. Tesis Doctoral, Univ. País Vasco, 204 p.
                     Pujalte, V., Robles, S., Robador, A., Baceta, J. I., & Orúe-Etxebarría, X. (1993). Shelf-to-basin Palaeocene palaeogeography and depositional
                        sequences, western Pyrenees, north Spain. In H. W. Posamentier, et al. (Eds.), Sequence Stratigraphy and Facies Associations, Special
                        Publication International Association of Sedimentologists (Vol. 18, pp. 369–395). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444304015.ch19
                     Pulgar, J. A., Gallart, J., Fernandez-Viejo, G., Perez-Estaun, A., Alvarez-Marron, J., & Escin Group (1996). Seismic image of the Cantabrian
                        Mountains in the western extension of the Pyrenean belt from integrated reﬂection and refraction data. Tectonophysics, 264(1-4), 1–19.
                        https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-1951(96)00114-X
                     Quintana, L., Pulgar, J. A., & Alonso, J. L. (2015). Displacement transfer from borders to interior of a plate: A crustal transect of Iberia.
                        Tectonophysics, 663, 378–398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2015.08.046
                     Ranero, C. R., & Perez-Gussinyé, M. (2010). Sequential faulting explains the asymmetry and extension discrepancy of conjugate margins.
                        Nature, 468, 294–299. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09520
                     Reston, T. J. (1996). The S reﬂector west of Galicia: The seismic signature of a detachment fault. Geophysical Journal International, 127(1),
                        230–244. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.1996.tb01547.x
                     Reston, T. J., & McDermott, K. G. (2011). Successive detachment faults and mantle unrooﬁng at magma-poor rifted margins. Geology, 39,
                        1071–1074. https://doi.org/10.1130/G32428.1
                     Robador Moreno, A., Samsó Escolé, J. M., Ramajo Cordero, J., Barnolas Cortinas, A., Clariana García, P., Martín Alfageme, S., & Gil Peña, I. (2010).
                        Mapa Geológico Digital continuo E. 1:50.000, Zona Pirineos Vasco-Cantábrica (Zona-1600). In GEODE. Geode. Mapa Digital continuo de
                        España.
                     Roca, E., Muñoz, J. A., Ferrer, O., & Ellouz, N. (2011). The role of the Bay of Biscay Mesozoic extensional structure in the conﬁguration of the
                        Pyrenean orogen: Constraints from the MARCONI deep seismic reﬂection survey. Tectonics, 30, TC2001. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                        2010TC002735
                     Rodríguez-Fernández, L. R., López-Olmedo, F., Oliveira, J. T., Medialdea, T., Terrinha, P., Matas, J., … Nozal, F. (2014). Geological Map of Spain
                        and Portugal, Scale 1:1.000.000. (Rodríguez Fernández, L. R. and Oliveira, J.T, Eds). IGME-LNEG). Madrid.
                     Rodríguez-Fernández, L. R., Pedrera, A., Pous, J., Ayala, C., González-Menéndez, L., Ibarra, P., … Seillé, H. (2015). Crustal structure of the south-
                        western termination of the Alpine Pyrenean-Cantabrian Orogen (NW Iberian Peninsula). Tectonophysics, 663, 322–338. https://doi.org/
                        10.1016/j.tecto.2015.06.010
                     Roure, F., Choukroune, P., Berastegui, X., Muñoz, J. A., Villien, A., Matheron, P., … Deramond, J. (1989). ECORS Deep Seismic data and balanced
                        cross-sections, geometric constraints to trace the evolution of the Pyrenees. Tectonics, 8, 41–50.
                     Sandwell, D. T., Garcia, E., Sooﬁ, K., Wessel, P., & Smith, W. H. F. (2013). Towards 1 mGal global marine gravity from CryoSat-2, Envisat, and
                        Jason-1. The Leading Edge, 32(8), 892–899. https://doi.org/10.1190/tle32080892.1
                     Serrano, A., & Martínez del Olmo, W. (2004). Estructuras diapíricas de la zona meridional de la Cuenca Vasco-Cantábrica. In J. A. Vera (Ed.),
                        Geología de España (pp. 334–338). Madrid: SGE-IGME.
                     Sibuet, J. C., Srivastava, S. P., & Spakman, W. (2004). Pyrenean orogeny and plate kinematics. Journal of Geophysical Research, 109, B08104.
                        https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JB002514



PEDRERA ET AL.                        MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                                                     3176
                 Tectonics                                                                                                      10.1002/2017TC004716



                     Teixell, A. (1998). Crustal structure and orogenic material budget in the west central Pyrenees. Tectonics, 17(3), 395–406. https://doi.org/
                        10.1029/98TC00561
                     Teixell, A., Labaume, P., & Lagabrielle, Y. (2016). The crustal evolution of the west central Pyrenees revisited: Inferences from a new kinematic
                        scenario. Comptes Rendus Geoscience, 348(3-4), 257–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crte.2015.10.010
                     Torne, M., Fernàndez, M., Vergés, J., Ayala, C., Salas, M. C., Jimenez-Munt, I., … Díaz, J. (2015). Crust and mantle lithospheric structure of the
                        Iberian Peninsula deduced from potential ﬁeld modeling and thermal analysis. Tectonophysics, 663, 419–433. https://doi.org/10.1016/
                        j.tecto.2015.06.003
                     Tugend, J., Manatschal, G., Kusznir, N. J., Masini, E., Mohn, G., & Thinon, I. (2014). Formation and deformation of hyperextended rift systems:
                        Insights from rift domain mapping in the Bay of Biscay Pyrenees. Tectonics, 33, 1239–1276. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014TC003529
                     Vacher, P., & Souriau, A. (2001). A 3-D model of the Pyrenean deep structure based on gravity modelling, seismic images, and petrological
                        constraints. Geophysical Journal International, 145, 460–470. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0956-540x.2001.01393.x
                     Vergés, J., & García-Senz, J. (2001). Mesozoic evolution and Cenozoic inversion of the Pyrenean Rift. In P. A. Ziegler, W. Cavazza, &
                        A. H. F. Robertson (Eds.), Peri-Tethys memoir 6: Peri-Tethyan Rift⁄wrench Basins and Passive Margins (Vol. 186, pp. 187–212). Mém. Mus. Natl
                        Hist. Nat.
                     Vergés, J., Millán, H., Roca, E., Muñoz, J., Marzo, M., Cirés, J., … Cloetingh, S. (1995). Eastern Pyrenees and related foreland basins: Pre-, syn-
                        and post-collisional crustal-scale cross-sections. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 12(8), 903–915. https://doi.org/10.1016/0264-
                        8172(95)98854-X
                     Vissers, R. L., van Hinsbergen, D. J., van der Meer, D. G., & Spakman, W. (2016). Cretaceous slab break-off in the Pyrenees: Iberian plate-
                        kinematics in paleomagnetic and mantle reference frames. Gondwana Research, 34, 49–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2016.03.006
                     Wang, Y., Chevrot, S., Monteiller, V., Komatitsch, D., Mouthereau, F., Manatschal, G., … Martin, R. (2016). The deep roots of the western
                        Pyrenees revealed by full waveform inversion of teleseismic P waves. Geology, 44(6), 475–478. https://doi.org/10.1130/g37812.1
                     Wernicke, B., & Axen, G. J. (1988). On the role of isostasy in the evolution of normal fault systems. Geology, 16(9), 848–851. https://doi.org/
                        10.1130/0091-7613(1988)016%3C0848:OTROII%3E2.3.CO;2
                     Whitmarsh, R. B., Beslier, M.-O., Wallace, P. J., & Shipboard Scientiﬁc Party (1998). Proceedings of the Ocean Drilling Program, Initial Reports. In
                        R. N. Riegel (Ed.), Ocean Drilling Program (Vol. 173). College Station, TX. https://doi.org/10.2973/odp.proc.ir.173.1998
                     Whitmarsh, R. B., Manatschal, G., & Minshull, T. A. (2001). Evolution of magma-poor continental margins from rifting to seaﬂoor spreading.
                        Nature, 413(6852), 150–154. https://doi.org/10.1038/35093085
                     Wood, L. J. (2010). Shale tectonics: A preface. In L. Wood (Ed.), Shale Tectonics, AAPG Memoir (Vol. 93, pp. 1–4).




PEDRERA ET AL.                        MANTLE ALONG THE BASQUE-CANTABRIAN BASIN                                                                                    3177
