See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/315671603



Determination of Reservoir Play Fairway of the Lower Acacus Formation in the
Ghadames Basin, NW Libya

Article · January 2017
DOI: 10.20431/2454-7980.0301009



CITATIONS                                                                                              READS

0                                                                                                      325

1 author:

            Omar Elfigih
            University of Benghazi
            16 PUBLICATIONS 8 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE




Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:


              Gullebi Field Study -Ghadames Basin, NW Libya View project



              NE-AlJabal AlAkhdar View project




 All content following this page was uploaded by Omar Elfigih on 28 March 2017.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)
Volume 3, Issue 1, 2017, PP 60-69
ISSN 2454-7980 (Online)
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.20431/2454-7980.0301009
www.arcjournals.org



   Determination of Reservoir Play Fairway of the Lower Acacus
          Formation in the Ghadames Basin, NW Libya
                                               Omar B. Elfigih
     Associate Professor, Petroleum Geologist, Department of Earth Sciences, Faculty of Science,
                               University of Benghazi, Benghazi-Libya
Abstract: The investigated well data sets have revealed that the Lower Acacus Formation in Ghadames Basin
can be defined by two deltaic complexes correspond to two distinct prograded clastic wedges, that appear to
exhibit significant differences in net sandstone thickness, lateral extension and lithofacies development. The play
fairway of the Lower Acacus sandstones is considered to be wide enough and corresponding to a sequence of
inter bedded fluvial-deltaic sandstones, marine sandstones and shale. To date, drilling activities targeting these
reservoir sandstones have been concentrated in the central and northern part of the fairway. Production from
these sandstones has been impressive. Average daily flow rate have increased from less than 300 BOPD and 0.1
MMCFGPD to more than 1000 BOPD and 5 MMCFGPD. Analyses of well test performance on the level of
Lower Acacus sandstone reservoirs suggest an ultimate oil reserves for the entire fairway in the Ghadames
Basin.
Keywords: Play, Fairway, Lower Acacus reservoirs, Ghadames Basin.

1. INTRODUCTION
The study area is called Ghadames (Hamada) Basin located in the northwestern part of Libya and
occupied an area of 150,000km2. Structurally, it is bounded from the north by Nefusa Uplift, from the
south by Gargaf Arch, from the east by Tripoli Soda Arch and from the west by the partial extension
of Tihemboka Uplift (Fig.1).




Figure1. Location map and the main structural elements of Ghadames Basin, NW Libya. (Arrows are indicting
directions of sediments transportation from source areas, modified after [9])

©ARC                                                                                                     Page | 60
Omar B. Elfigih

In the Ghadames (Hamada) Basin, several new and ongoing plays have exhibited considerable success,
beginning in the 1980’sowing in the large part to the discovery of the multi-reservoirs in the
Paleozoic-Mesozoic sequence. Among these sandstone reservoirs are the Lower Acacus sandstones
(U. Silurian). In particular, the Lower Acacus sandstones are unique in terms of being most prolific
and may represent one of the most prospective horizons in the Ghadames (Hamada) Basin. For these
reasons this paper will be dealing with the possible definition, determination and spatial extension of
the reservoirs play fairway of the Lower Acacus Formation.
1.1. Previous Work
A number of regional studies investigated potential play types and addressed new regional evaluations
of the Ghadames (Hamada) Basin. Hammuda (1978) [1], summarized the results of a geological study
conducted as part of an evaluation for recoverable reserve estimates for NOC. He concluded that
AlHamada Al Hamra (Ghadames Basin) area had more traps than had been discovered to that time.
Echikh and Sulieman (1982) [2], completed a geological study and petroleum evaluation of the
Ghadames Basin for NOC, no new original work was contributed. Shah et al. (1988) [3], studied
geological factors controlling the oil and gas deposits of the Ghadames (Hamada) Basin, and made
recommendations for their future exploration. Santa Maria (1991) [4], completed a regional study on
the Ghadames (Hamada) Basin. The main purpose of this study was to evaluate the hydrocarbon
potential on the light of characteristic sedimentary cycles for the stratigraphic sequence in the
Ghadames Basin. Elfigih (1991) [5], studied the reservoir characteristics of the Lower Acacus
Formation in NC2 concession and furnished the idea of possible two deltaic pulses that may be
contributed to the formation of the sandstones of Lower Acacus Formation. Cridland (1991) [6],
completed a seismic stratigraphic evaluation of NC2 concession in which he integrated his seismic
interpretation with existing studies, and referred to possible play types of Lower Acacus sandstone
reservoirs in his study. Technica Exploitation Group (1995) [7], initiated an exploitation study for
AGOCO regarding hydrocarbon pools of Lower Acacus sandstones in selected wells in the west of
NC2 concession, and recommended these sandstones for their good reservoir quality. Elfigih (2000)
[8], has completed a study leading to PhD degree entitled regional diagenesis and its relation to facies
change in the Upper Silurian, Lower Acacus Formation, Hamada (Ghadames) Basin, NW Libya. He
furnished the basis for approaches to the analysis of regional diagenesis and for establishment of
parameters for basin-wide 3D geological model to achieve regional understanding of diagenetic
change and for realistic reservoir representation and prediction. Elfigih (2010) [9], has published a
paper entitled: regional aspects of the Lower Acacus sandstone play, Ghadames Basin, NW Libya, in
which he interpreted fluvio-deltaic pulses in the Lower Acacus sandstones and said may be used to
furnish the playground for the application of sequence stratigraphic analysis for the first time in the
Ghadames Basin. Elfigih (2010) [10], has published a paper entitled: The prospectivity of the
Devonian reservoirs in the concession NC8A, Hamada (Ghadames) Basin, NW Libya (a case study),
in which he concluded that, the Devonian sandstones in concession NC8A could be regarded as of
shallow targets and their prospectivity is largely dependent on vertical and lateral facies change.
1.2. Purpose of the Study
By using core data, well logs, isopach pattern maps and through detailed north-south cross section of
the Lower Acacus Formation, the outcome of this study will provide a better understanding of
depositional environment and distribution of deltaic facies complexes and will contribute to a better
definition and prediction of the fairway of the Lower Acacus reservoirs in the Ghadames basin.
2. METHODOLOGY
To achieve the objectives of this study, methods employed were:
Analysis, correlation, and calibration of conventional wireline logs, and cores to provide information
for interpretation of the stratigraphic framework, units, and depositional environments of the Lower
Acacus Formation. Stratigraphic cross-sections of wireline logs and stratigraphic/structural subsurface
mapping of Lower Acacus Formation were used to reconstruct the configuration of strata; they form
the basis for determination of play fairway in the study area.
3. STRATIGRAPHY
Extensive wireline data sets are loaded for each well and core description data results are incorporated.
Based on these data, well correlation panels are built through N-S and NE-NWN regional cross
sections (Figs.2 and 3). In both cross sections, Stacked fluvial-deltaic deposits are included within a
foreland sequence and alternating with marginal(prodeltaic) to marine deposits from south to north and
International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                        Page | 61
Determination of Reservoir Play Fairway of the Lower Acacus Formation in the Ghadames Basin,
NW Libya

from northeast to northwest-north directions, sourced possibly from Cambrian-PreCambrian orogenic
belt (high areas) to the south and to the northeast (Fig.1). Laterally from south to north (Fig.2) and
from northeast to northwest-north (Fig.3); the Lower Acacus sandstones comprise proximal foreland
fluvial channel deposits include conglomerates and sandstones (Af1-Af9 units). To the central part (in
the vicinity of concessions NC2, NC3, NC4 and NC5) of the Ghadames Basin, Silurian seaway was
acted as site for deltaic sandstones (A1-A14 units) accumulation which are changing N-NW direction
to more marginal siltstone, shale and reworked marine sandstones (Am units). Vertically, underlying
the Lower Acacus sandstones is the marine, thick Tanezzuft shale, where the overlaying deposits is the
middle Acacus shale. Previous studies of the Lower Acacus interval have tended to focus either on its
northern (NC2 concession) or southern part (NC7A and NC8A concessions). For this reason, the
present paper has focused on the regional well data available throughout the Ghadames Basin.
Meanwhile, to show that the Lower Acacus sandstones are typified by having complex architectures
that involves facies changes, overlapping or truncation of individual facies especially northward.




Figure2. North-South well-logs regional cross section illustrating the typical Gamma Ray signature associated
with the depositional facies that make-up the possible prograded sequence of the southern delta of the Lower
Acacus Formation, Ghadames Basin, NW Libya (after [9]).




Figure3. Northeast-northwest-north stratigraphic cross section in the northern flank of the Ghadames Basin
showing possible prograded eastern delta (after [9 ]).
International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                           Page | 62
Omar B. Elfigih

4. LITHOFACIES ANALYSIS
According to Elfigih (1991 and 2000), the Lower Acacus sandstones are divided into about 14
sandstone units, where regional integration of wireline-logs and core description permits analysis of
some specific units (A8, A10, A12, A14, Af3 and Am) as they appear the most thicker, of great
extension, and most prolific units throughout the basin. The description of these units and their
representative lithofacies is as following:
4.1. Unit A8 (Parallel-Cross Laminated Sandstone Lithofacies)
This unit have been examined in core #4, in well C1-NC2 at an interval of 9702’-9732’, (Fig. 4), and
was described as fine-medium grained, subangular to rounded with parallel and cross lamination
Sandstone with alternating shale lamination, of proximal delta front origin.
4.2. Unit A10 (Wavy-Rippled Sandstone Lithofacies)
This unit have been examined in core #2, in well B1-NC2 at an interval of 8637’-8650’, (Fig. 5), and
was described as light grey-light green, fine-medium grained, friable at some places, subangular to
rounded, well sorted sandstone, with mud clasts, wavy-rippled lamination at top, calcareous cement,
shaly at the base of proximal delta front origin.
4.3. Unit A12 (Cross Laminated, Carbonaceous Sandstone Lithofacies)
This unit have been examined in core #1, in well C1-70 at an interval of 9710’-9730’, (Fig. 6), and was
described as grey, grayish white, fine grained, subangular-subrounded, moderately sorted sandstone,
occasionally with carbonaceous materials, cross laminated, rip-up clasts, calcareous, with oil stain, of
proximal delta front origin.
4.4. Unit A14 (Parallel To Indistinctive Laminated Sandstone Lithofacies)
This unit have been examined in core #1&2, in well E1-NC2 at intervals of 9105’-9126’& 9126’-
9146’, (Fig.7), and was described as “grey, occasionally tan, medium grained, subangular to rounded,
moderately sorted sandstone, with mud clasts, parallel lamination with oil stain at top, indistinctive
lamination and some burrows at bottom, of proximal delta front origin.
4.5. Unit Af3 (Trough Cross Laminated To Ripple Laminated Sandstone Lithofacies)
This unit have been examined in core #8, in well Z1-66 at an interval 9110’-9160’, (Fig.8), and was
described as light grey, whitish cream, medium grained, Sandstone with trough cross lamination at
base, non calcareous, getting finer grained at top, rippled at places, channel fill. Some silty shale at the
most top, light grey, sticky, gummy, horizontal lamination, rootlets, of overbank deposits. Also this
unit Af3 was described as massive, iron oxides-rich sandstone of fluvial fill origin in well C1-61 in
core #3 at interval 7507’-7555’ (Fig. 9).
4.6. Unit Am (Glauconitic, Rippled Sandstone Lithofacies)
This unit have been examined in core #1&2, in well Q1-23 at intervals of 7440’-7470’ and 7470’-
7485’, (Fig.10), and was described as whitish grey, fine grained, subangular-subrounded, moderately
sorted sandstone, micaceous in parts, glauconitic, rippled, calcareous, reworked marine sandstone
origin.




   Figure4. Unit A8, C#4 of Lower Acacus Fm., in wellC1-NC2   Figure5. Unit A10, C#2 of Lower Acacus Fm., in well B1-NC2,

International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                                           Page | 63
Determination of Reservoir Play Fairway of the Lower Acacus Formation in the Ghadames Basin,
NW Libya




    Figure6. Unit A12, C#1 of Lower Acacus Fm., in well C1-70     Figure 7. Unit A14, C#1&2 of Lower Acacus Fm., in well E1-NC2




    Figure8. Unit Af3, C#8 of Lower Acacus Fm., in well Z1-66     Figure9. Unit Af3, C#3 of Lower Acacus Fm., in well C1-61




                                  Figure10. Unit Am, C#1&2 of Lower Acacus Fm., in well Q1-23

International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                                              Page | 64
Omar B. Elfigih

5. SANDSTONE PATTERNS
Regional net sandstone isopach patterns of the Lower Acacus Formation are showing in (Fig.11). The
mapped sandstone units are recorded 75API or less on GR-Log. Isopach trends from thick to thin area
are largely oriented to N-NW and E-W, to show a regional lobate morphology fashion gets more linear
to the south as may infer from channel like contours configuration which reflect the accumulation of
the fluvial channel deposits where the isopach maxima 220ft and extend at least 250km from south to
north, compared with the eastern part (in the vicinity of NC2, NC3 &NC4) of about 130ft and extends
about 100km to the west reflect a westerly shift to northern shoreline orientation. However, individual
sand beds are observed to split or merge over short and long distances with thicker channel sands
exhibiting good continuity between wells especially in the southern part of the basin.
A fairly abrupt boundary is evident in the vicinity of (NC8A concession) extends to SW of well L-1,
which have been interpreted as marking the southern limit of the Lower Acacus Formation as this
formation have been truncated by erosion along this high relief area.




      Figure11. Net sandstone isopach map of the Lower Acacus Formation, Ghadames Basin, NW Libya
6. STRATIGRAPHIC INTEGRATION
The integrated dataset including well logs, core description and thickness trend map is used to support
the interpretation of possible two major deltaic complexes in the Lower Acacus sandstones (Fig. 12).
These two deltaic complexes correspond to two distinct prograded clastic wedges (Figs.2 and 3), that
appear to exhibit significant differences in thickness, extension and lithofacies development. The

International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                      Page | 65
Determination of Reservoir Play Fairway of the Lower Acacus Formation in the Ghadames Basin,
NW Libya

southern delta complex package is relatively of thicker sediments, river dominated and displaying
evidence of south sediments source. The eastern deltaic complex is interpreted of thin sediments,
storm-wave dominated, that has an eastern sourced area. This evolution of these two deltaic complexes
consisting of several deltaic lobes or depocenters having major regional seaward/landward stepping,
vertical stacking and flooding events that may cause shifting of depositional lobes.
                              10°                                                     15°




                                                              Tripoli
                                                                                           Me
                                                   Nefu                                      d i te
                                                        sa Ar                                      r ra
                                  ia




                                                             ch                                        n ea
                              ni s




                                                                                                           nS
                                                                  Eastern                                       ea
                            Tu




                                                                  Delta




                                                                     Trip irt e H i
                                        L.Acacus
                                        Fairway

                                                                         ol i -S
                                                                          (S
       30°                                                                      oda h)
                                                                                   Ar ch
                                                                                   g

                                       Sout hern

                                                                                                    L ib ya
                                       Delta           Ham ada
                                                        Basin
                 Alge ria




                                                                           h
                                                                  ga f Arc
                                                              Gar                               0     200       300km
                            ++ ++
                            ++
Figure12. Interpreted regional extent of the two possible deltaic complexes in the Lower Acacus Formation,
Ghadames Basin, NW Libya.
7. DETERMINATION OF LOWER ACACUS RESERVOIR PLAY FAIRWAY
The integrated dataset (wireline logs, cores and maps) is used to study the regional lateral and vertical
evolution of the sedimentary system and the structural framework to identify areas that have
hydrocarbon potential. From the database, the play fairway is estimated to be about 200km wide and
350km long (grey shaded area), occupies a trend along the NW flank of the Ghadames Basin (Fig.13).
To the east, the Lower Acacus sandstone terminates by Sirte high, which form the resistant eastern
border of the Ghadames Basin. Southward, the fairway of the Lower Acacus was either eroded or
terminated by series of orogenic events in the vicinity of Gargaf high. To the south of Gargaf high, the
Lower Acacus sandstone outcrops almost continuously along the margin of Murzuk Basin, providing
excellent exposure in Ghat area. Northward, the fairway margins are defined by increasing depth of
burial, thinning and pinch out of the Lower Acacus sandstones to siltstone and shale beneath the
Nefusa high. To date, drilling activities targeting these reservoir sandstones have been concentrated in
the central (NC5, NC4, NC3 concessions), and northern part of fairway (NC2, NC1 concessions). The
largest of these concessions is the NC2 which is have more than 20 wells. The Lower Acacus
sandstone reservoirs in this concession average 25ft in thickness and occur at different depths as
multiple pay zones (from 8000’to 9500’). Production from these sandstones in this NC2 concession
has been impressive. Average daily flow rate have increased from less than 300BOPD and 0.1
MMCFGPD to more than 1000BOPD and 5 MMCFGPD. These positive flow rates typified most
wells in the concession NC2 with decreases in water production.
Analyses of well test performance in the Ghadames (Hamada) Basin on the level of Lower Acacus
sandstone reservoirs suggest an ultimate oil reserves in NC2 concession structures only are in range of
150-200 MMSTBOIP and 75-100 MMMSCFGIP. This translates into as much as 300-400

International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                                                Page | 66
Omar B. Elfigih

MMSTBOIP and of about 150-200 MMMSCFGIP for the entire fairway in the Ghadames Basin.
However, the most northern part of concession NC2 in the vicinity of wells A1-NC2, Q1-23 and U1-
23, also concession NC1 in the vicinity of well D1-23"Tigi area" are considered to be outside the
interpreted play fairway of the Lower Acacus reservoirs (Fig. 13) as these wells are characterized by
more low quality, silty-shaly sandstones of marginal part of the interpreted northward prograded delta.
N-S structural cross section (Fig.14) is showing the structural style characterizing the Lower Acacus
sandstone fairway. To the north and at the vicinity of NC2, NC3, NC4 and NC5 concessions, normal
faulting, associated folding along with the development of good quality coastal-deltaic lobes are
evident at Lower Acacus level. These faults appear to be associated with older basement rocks in the
basin and are thus considered to be the effect of reactivation of older structures at Mesozoic or later
age. in the vicinity of NC7A concession, fluvial channel sandstones of poor reservoir quality were
dominating the area. Also, reverse faults are observed and display up to 100-150ft of vertical offset,
they are generally strike parallel to the margins of the Silurian paleo-basins and may show some
genetic relationship.




  Figure13. Regional Structure Contour Map on Top of the Lower Acacus Formation, Ghadames, NW Libya.



International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                      Page | 67
Determination of Reservoir Play Fairway of the Lower Acacus Formation in the Ghadames Basin,
NW Libya




Figure14. North-South Cross Section Showing Structural Style of the Lower Acacus Fairway, Ghadames Basin,
NW Libya (see figure 13 to locate line of N-S cross-section).

8. CONCLUSIONS
The integrated dataset including well logs, core description and regional structural and net thickness
trend maps is used to support the interpretation of possible two major deltaic complexes in the Lower
Acacus sandstones. These two deltaic complexes correspond to two distinct prograded clastic wedges,
that appear to exhibit significant differences in thickness, lateral extension and lithofacies
development. The play fairway of the Lower Acacus reservoirs is typified most drilled wells in the
concessions NC2, NC3, NC4 and NC5 in which good reservoir quality and sandstones distribution
may serve to build play concepts for future prospect identification.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am grateful to the Arabian Gulf Oil Company (AGOCO) for their generous help for providing me
unlimited access to the core storage facility, and technical data library (TDL). I express my sincere
thanks and appreciation to all who helped me in whatever capacity in preparing this paper.
                                            REFERENCES
[1] Hammuda, O.S., 1980, Geologic factors controlling fluid trapping and anomalous freshwater
    occurrence in Tadrart sandstone, Al Hamada Al Hamra area, Ghadames Basin, in Salem, M., and
    Busrewil, M. (eds.), The Geology of Libya, Vol. II, p.501- 507.
[2] Echikh, A, and A.S. Suleiman, 1982, Preliminary geological study and petroleum evaluation of
    Ghadames Basin, NOC internal report.
[3] Shah, H.A., Elfigih O.B., and Shahlool A., 1988, Geological factors controlling the oil and gas
    deposits of Hamada Basin and recommendations for their future exploration, AGOCO internal
    report, Benghazi, 34p.
[4] Santa Maria, F.S., 1991, Ghadames Basin regional study, analysis and evaluation, AGOCO
    internal report, Benghazi, 158 p.
[5] Teknica Exploitation Group, Arabian Gulf Oil Company (AGOCO), 1995, Exploitation
    evaluation study in the west half of concession NC2, Benghazi, 95p.
[6] Elfigih, O.B., 1991, The sedimentology and reservoir characteristics of the Lower Acacus
    Formation, NC2 concession, Hamada Basin, NW Libya, MSc. thesis, Memorial University of
    Newfoundland, St.John’s, Newfoundland, Canada, 569p.
[7] Cridland, R., 1991, Seismic stratigraphic evaluation of NC2 concession, Ghadames Basin,
    AGOCO, Benghazi, 78p.

International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                        Page | 68
            Omar B. Elfigih

            [8] Elfigih, O.B., 2000, Regional diagenesis and its relation to facies change in the Upper Silurian,
                 Lower Acacus Formation, Hamada (Ghadames) Basin, northwestern Libya, Ph.D. thesis
                 Memorial University of Newfoundland, St.John’s, Newfoundland, Canada, 399p.
            [9] Elfigih O. B., 2010, Regional aspects of the Lower Acacus sandstone play, Ghadames Basin, NW
                 Libya, Fifth international conference on the geology of the Tethys Realm, South Valley
                 University, Egypt, January 2010, P. 445-454.
            [10] Elfigih O. B., 2010, The prospectivity of the Devonian reservoirs in the concession NC8A,
                 Hamada (Ghadames) Basin, NW Libya (a case study), Fifth international conference on the
                 geology of the Tethys Realm, South Valley University, Egypt, January 2010, p. 455-468.
            AUTHOR’S BIOGRAPHY
                                Dr. Omar B. Elfigih, is an associated professor and petroleum geologist at the
                                Department of Earth Sciences, University of Benghazi. Born on Dec. 16.1959, he
                                has an MSc and PhD in petroleum geology from Memorial University of
                                Newfoundland-Canada. Worked for the Arabian Gulf Oil Company (AGOCO) as
                                petroleum geologist, technical advisor and led the Ghadames Basin group for
                                hydrocarbon exploration researches. He worked as private consultant and
                                exploration geologist with BP-Libya. He was the head of the Department of Earth
                                Sciences-University of Benghazi from Oct. 2014 to Oct. 2016. Head of scientific
            affairs at the University of Technical Research for Engineering Sciences (UTRES), Benghazi-Libya.
            Research interests involve sedimentary basin analysis for hydrocarbons exploration, reservoir
            characterization and evaluation and studies in petroleum system and stratigraphic models in
            exploration. He is a member in many geological societies; the Geological Association of Canada
            (GAC), the Earth Sciences Society of Libya (ESSL) and the American Association of Petroleum
            Geologists (AAPG).




            International Journal of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering (IJPPE)                    Page | 69


View publication stats
